 learn about diabetes you can learn how to take care of your diabetes and prevent some of the serious problems diabetes can cause . the more you know , the better you can manage your diabetes . share this booklet with your family and friends so they will understand more about diabetes . also make sure to ask your health care team any questions you might have . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is when your blood glucose * , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles . your blood carries glucose to all of your body ’ s cells to use for energy . your pancreas an organ , located between your stomach and spine , that helps with digestion releases a hormone it makes , called insulin , into your blood . insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your body ’ s cells . sometimes your body doesn ’ t make enough insulin or the insulin doesn ’ t work the way it should . glucose then stays in your blood and doesn ’ t reach your cells . your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . what is prediabetes ? prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . with prediabetes , your chances of getting type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke are higher . with some weight loss and moderate physical activity , you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you can even return to normal glucose levels , possibly without taking any medicines . caution : take steps to prevent type 2 diabetes now . prediabetes diabetes normal what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? the signs and symptoms of diabetes are being very thirsty urinating often feeling very hungry feeling very tired losing weight without trying sores that heal slowly dry , itchy skin feelings of pins and needles in your feet losing feeling in your feet blurry eyesight some people with diabetes don ’ t have any of these signs or symptoms . the only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test . what kind of diabetes do you have ? the three main types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . people can develop diabetes at any age . both women and men can develop diabetes . type 1 diabetes type 1 diabetes , which used to be called juvenile diabetes , develops most often in young people ; however , type 1 diabetes can also develop in adults . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin because the body ’ s immune system , which normally protects you from infection by getting rid of bacteria , viruses , and other harmful substances , has attacked and destroyed the cells that make insulin . treatment for type 1 diabetes includes taking shots , also called injections , of insulin . sometimes taking medicines by mouth . making healthy food choices . being physically active . controlling your blood pressure levels . blood pressure is the force of blood flow inside your blood vessels . controlling your cholesterol levels . cholesterol is a type of fat in your body ’ s cells , in your blood , and in many foods . type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes , which used to be called adult-onset diabetes , can affect people at any age , even children . however , type 2 diabetes develops most often in middle- aged and older people . people who are overweight and inactive are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance a condition that occurs when fat , muscle , and liver cells do not use insulin to carry glucose into the body ’ s cells to use for energy . as a result , the body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas keeps up with the added demand by making more insulin . over time , the pancreas doesn ’ t make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . if your pancreas can no longer make enough insulin , you will need to treat your type 2 diabetes . treatment for type 2 diabetes includes using diabetes medicines making healthy food choices being physically active controlling your blood pressure levels controlling your cholesterol levels gestational diabetes gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . all women have insulin resistance late in their pregnancy . if the pancreas doesn ’ t make enough insulin during pregnancy , a woman develops gestational diabetes . overweight or obese women have a higher chance of gestational diabetes . also , gaining too much weight during pregnancy may increase your likelihood of developing gestational diabetes . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . however , a woman who has had gestational diabetes is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes later in life . babies born to mothers who had gestational diabetes are also more likely to develop obesity and type 2 diabetes . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what i need to know about gestational diabetes at why do you need to take care of your diabetes ? over time , diabetes can lead to serious problems with your blood vessels , heart , nerves , kidneys , mouth , eyes , and feet . these problems can lead to an amputation , which is surgery to remove a damaged toe , foot , or leg , for example . the most serious problem caused by diabetes is heart disease . when you have diabetes , you are more than twice as likely as people without diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke . with diabetes , you may not have the usual signs or symptoms of a heart attack . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . who is part of your health care team ? most people with diabetes get care from primary care providers , such as internists , family physicians , or pediatricians . a team of health care providers can also improve your diabetes care . in addition to a primary care provider , your health care team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care a dietitian , a nurse , or a certified diabetes educator experts who can provide information about managing diabetes a counselor or mental health professional a pharmacist a dentist an ophthalmologist or an optometrist for eye care a podiatrist for foot care if diabetes makes you feel sad or angry , or if you have other problems that worry you , you should talk with a counselor or mental health professional . your doctor or certified diabetes educator can help you find a counselor . talk with your doctor about what vaccines and immunizations , or shots , you should get to keep from getting sick . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . be sure you understand everything you need to know about taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . take care of your diabetes each day do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . these things may seem like a lot to do at first . just make small changes until these steps become a normal part of your day . follow your healthy eating plan ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . this plan , often called medical nutrition therapy , will include regular monitoring by your dietitian and education about how to adjust your eating habits as the need occurs . medical nutrition therapy is usually covered by insurance or medicare as long as your doctor refers you . your dietitian can help you plan meals that include foods that you and your family like and that are good for you . your healthy eating plan will include breads , cereals , rice , and whole grains fruits and vegetables meat and meat substitutes dairy products healthy fats your plan will also help you learn how to eat the right amount , or portions , of food . making good food choices will help you reach and stay at a healthy weight keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels under control prevent heart and blood vessel disease if you take insulin , look at the white boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . don ’ t skip meals , especially if you ’ ve already taken your insulin , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . learn more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . if you don ’ t take insulin , look at the blue boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . don ’ t skip meals , especially if you take diabetes medicines , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . read more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . eat several small meals during the day instead of big meals . read more about healthy eating plans in what i need to know about eating and diabetes at be physically active physical activity helps you stay healthy . physical activity is especially good if you have diabetes because it helps you reach or stay at a healthy weight helps insulin work better to lower your blood glucose levels is good for your heart and lungs gives you more energy even small amounts of physical activity help manage diabetes , such as when you are physically active at work or home . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . not all physical activity has to take place at the same time . increase daily activity by decreasing time spent watching tv or at the computer . children and adolescents should limit screen time not related to school to less than 2 hours a day . limiting screen time can help you meet your physical activity goal . people with diabetes should always talk with a doctor before starting a new physical activity program . do aerobic activities , such as brisk walking , which use the body ’ s large muscles to make the heart beat faster . the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head , shoulder , and hip movements . do activities to strengthen muscles and bone , such as sit-ups or lifting weights . aim for two times a week . stretch to increase flexibility , lower stress , and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity . many activities can help your child and your family stay active and have fun . consider activities that they might enjoy and can stick with , such as playing basketball dancing to music with friends taking a walk or a bike ride physical activity helps you stay healthy . action steps if you take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . don ’ t start a physical activity program when your blood glucose levels are high or if you have ketones in your blood or urine . read more about ketones in the section monitor your diabetes . don ’ t be physically active right before you go to bed because it could cause low blood glucose while you sleep . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . ask your doctor about whether you need to eat before you are physically active . when you are being physically active , carry glucose tablets or a carbohydrate-rich snack or drink with you , such as fruit or juice , in case your blood glucose levels go too low . read more about increasing your physical activity in what i need to know about physical activity and diabetes at take your medicines as prescribed if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it doesn ’ t make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . diabetes medicines most people with type 2 diabetes use medicines other than insulin shots . people with type 2 diabetes use medicine to help their blood glucose levels stay in their target range . if your body makes insulin and the insulin doesn ’ t lower your blood glucose levels enough , you may need to take one or more medicines . diabetes medicines come in pill and shot form . some people take diabetes medicines once a day and other medicines more often . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . sometimes , people who take diabetes medicines may also need insulin shots for a while . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . if you get sick or have surgery , your diabetes medicines may no longer work to lower your blood glucose levels . always check with your doctor before you stop taking your diabetes medicines . insulin shots only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take and which of the following ways to take insulin is best for you : insulin shot . you ’ ll use a needle attached to a syringe a hollow tube with a plunger that you fill with a dose of insulin . some people use an insulin pen , a pen like device with a needle and a cartridge of insulin . never share insulin needles or insulin pens , even with family . insulin pump . an insulin pump is a small device filled with insulin that you wear on your belt or keep in your pocket . the pump connects to a small , plastic tube and a small needle . you or your doctor inserts the needle under your skin . the needle can stay in for several days . insulin jet injector . this device sends a fine spray of insulin through your skin with high-pressure air instead of a needle . insulin injection port . you or your doctor inserts a small tube just beneath your skin , where it remains in place for several days . you can inject insulin into the end of the tube instead of through your skin . read more about ways to take insulin in alternative devices for taking insulin at only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take . other medicines your doctor may prescribe other medicines to help with problems related to diabetes , such as aspirin for heart health cholesterol-lowering medicines medicines for high blood pressure remembering to take your medicines at the correct times each day can be challenging . many people find that keeping a weekly pill box with separate boxes for each day , and even separate boxes for morning and evening , can help . also ask your health care team to update your list of medicines at each visit so you always have an accurate list of what medicines to take and when . read more about diabetes and medicines in what ineed to know about diabetes medicines at monitor your diabetes check your blood glucose levels checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . if your blood has too much or too little glucose , you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . a member of your health care team will show you how to check your blood glucose levels using a blood glucose meter . your health care team can teach you how to prick your finger to get a drop of blood for testing use your meter to find out your blood glucose level from your drop of blood read more in continuous glucose monitoring at your health insurance or medicare may pay for the blood glucose meter and test strips you need . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check before and after eating , before and after physical activity , before bed , and sometimes in the middle of the night . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . target range for blood glucose levels most people with diabetes should try to keep their blood glucose levels as close as possible to the level of someone who doesn ’ t have diabetes . this normal target range is about 70 to 130. the closer to normal your blood glucose levels are , the lower your chance of developing serious health problems . ask your doctor what your target levels are and when you should check your blood glucose levels with a meter . make copies of the chart in the section your diabetes care records to take with you when you visit your doctor . reaching your target range all of the time can be hard . remember , the closer you get to your target range , the better you will feel . the a1 ctest another test for blood glucose , the a1c also called the hemoglobin a1c test , hb a1c , or glycohemoglobin testis a blood test that reflects the average level of glucose in your blood during the past 2 to 3 months . you should have the a1c test at least twice a year . if your result is not on target , your doctor may have you take the test more often to see if your a1c improves . for the test , your doctor will draw a sample of your blood during an office visit or send you to a lab to have your blood drawn . your a1 ctest result is given as a percentage . your a1c result plus the record of your blood glucose numbers show whether your blood glucose levels are under control . if your a1c result is too high , you may need to change your diabetes treatment plan . your health care team can help you decide what part of your plan to change . if your a1c result is on target , then your diabetes treatment plan is working . the lower your a1c result , the lower your chance of having diabetes problems . talk with your doctor about what your a1c target should be . your personal target may be above or below the target shown in the chart . a1c targets target for most people with diabetes below 7 percent time to change my diabetes care plan 8 percent or above a1c targets can also depend on how long you have had diabetes whether or not you have other health problems read more about a1c targets at tests for ketones you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you ’ re sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. your body makes ketones when you burn fat instead of glucose for energy . if you have too many ketones , you are more likely to have a serious condition called ketoacidosis . if not treated , ketoacidosis can cause death . signs of ketoacidosis are vomiting weakness fast breathing sweet-smelling breath ketoacidosis is more likely in people with type 1 diabetes . your doctor or diabetes educator will show you how to test for ketones . keep daily records make copies of the daily diabetes record at the end of this booklet . then , write down the results of your blood glucose checks each day . you may also want to record what you ate , how you felt , and whether you were physically active . bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . they can use your records to see whether you need changes in your diabetes medicines or in your healthy eating plan . action steps if you take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take insulin the amount and type of insulin you take what types of physical activity you do and for how long when and what you eat whether you have ketones in your blood or urine when you are sick action steps if you don ’ t take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take your medicines what types of physical activity you do and for how long learn about high and low blood glucose levels sometimes , no matter how hard you try to keep your blood glucose levels in your target range , they will be too high or too low . blood glucose that ’ s too high or too low can make you feel sick . if you try to control your high or low blood glucose and cant , you may become even sicker and need help . talk with your doctor to learn how to handle these emergencies . learn about high blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . see the chart on page 54. high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you don ’ t have enough insulin in your body . high blood glucose can happen if you miss taking your diabetes medicines eat too much don ’ t get enough physical activity have an infection get sick are stressed take medicines that can cause high blood glucose be sure to tell your doctor about other medicines you take . when you ’ re sick , be sure to check your blood glucose levels and keep taking your diabetes medicines . read more about how to take care of yourself when you ’ re sick in the section take care of your diabetes during special times or events . signs that your blood glucose levels may be too high are the following : feeling thirsty feeling weak or tired headaches urinating often having trouble paying attention blurry vision yeast infections very high blood glucose may also make you feel sick to your stomach . if your blood glucose levels are high much of the time , or if you have symptoms of high blood glucose , call your doctor . you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . learn about low blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . low blood glucose can come on fast and can be caused by taking too much diabetes medicine missing or delaying a meal being more physically active than usual drinking alcoholic beverages sometimes , medicines you take for other health problems can cause your blood glucose levels to drop . signs your blood glucose levels may be too low are the following : hunger dizziness or shakiness confusion being pale sweating more weakness anxiety or moodiness headaches a fast heartbeat if your blood glucose levels drop lower , you could have severe hypoglycemia , where you pass out or have a seizure . a seizure occurs when cells in the brain release a rush of energy that can cause changes in behavior or muscle contractions . some seizures are life threatening . if you have any of these symptoms , check your blood glucose levels . if your blood glucose levels are less than 70 , have one of the following right away : three or four glucose tablets one serving of glucose gel the amount equal to 15 grams of carbohydrates 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of fruit juice 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of a regular non-diet softdrink 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of milk five or six pieces of hard candy 1 tablespoon of sugar , syrup , or honey have one of these foods or drinks when your blood glucose levels are low . after 15 minutes , check your blood glucose levels again . repeat these steps until your blood glucose levels are 70 or above . if it will be at least 1 hour before your next meal , eat a snack . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . a glucagon kit has a vial of glucagon , a syringe , and a needle to inject the glucagon . given as a shot , the glucagon quickly raises blood glucose . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you ’ ll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon kit is not available . action steps if you take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor if you ’ ve passed out from low blood glucose . ask your doctor about glucagon . glucagon is a medicine that raises blood glucose . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . when you have severe hypoglycemia , someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon shot is not available . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor about other medicines you are taking . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicines might cause low blood glucose . read more about low blood glucose in hypoglycemia at tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of day or night , several times in a row . prevent diabetes problems taking care of your diabetes every day will help your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels stay in your target ranges . caring for your diabetes can also help prevent other health problems over the years . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . types of diabetes problems diabetes problems can damage parts of the body such as the heart blood vessels eyes kidneys nerves heart and blood vessel disease can lead to heart attacks and strokes . nerve damage can lead to a loss of feeling in the feet , which may lead to an amputation . you will want to take steps to prevent these diabetes problems . read more about preventing diabetes problems in the following booklets at these booklets are also available in spanish and large-print versions : prevent diabetes problems : keep your diabetes under control prevent diabetes problems : keep your eyes healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your feet healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your heart and blood vessels healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your kidneys healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your mouth healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your nervous system healthy take care of your diabetes during special times or events diabetes is part of your life . you can learn how to take care of yourself and your diabetes when you ’ re sick , when you ’ re at school or work , when you ’ re away from home , when an emergency or a natural disaster happens , or when you ’ re thinking about having a baby or are pregnant . when you ’ re sick having a cold , the flu , or an infection can raise your blood glucose levels . being sick puts stress on your body . your body releases hormones to deal with the stress and to fight the sickness . higher hormone levels can also cause high blood glucose levels . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you ’ re sick . the first step is to talk with your health care team and write down how often to check your blood glucose levels whether you should check for ketones in your blood or urine whether you should change your usual dose of your diabetes medicines what to eat and drink when to call your doctor action steps if you take insulin take your insulin , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . ask your health care team about how to adjust your insulin dose based on your blood glucose test results . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin take your diabetes medicines , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . people who are sick sometimes feel as though they can ’ t eat as much or can ’ t keep food down , which can cause low blood glucose levels . consuming carbohydrate-rich drinks or snacks can help prevent low blood glucose . if you are sick , your health care team may recommend the following : check your blood glucose levels at least four times a day and write down the results in your record book . keep your results handy so you can report the results to your health care team . keep taking your diabetes medicines , even if you can ’ t eat . drink at least 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of water or other calorie-free , caffeine-free liquid every hour while you ’ re awake . if you can ’ t eat your usual food , try eating or drinking any of the following to prevent low blood glucose levels : juice saltine crackers dry toast soup broth or bouillon ice pops or sherbet gelatin that isn ’ t sugar-free milk yogurt soda that isn ’ t sugar-free your doctor may ask that you call right away if your blood glucose levels are above 240 even though you ’ ve taken your diabetes medicines your urine or blood ketone levels are above normal you vomit more than once you have diarrhea for more than 6 hours you have trouble breathing you have a high fever you can ’ t think clearly or you feel more drowsy than usual you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . when you ’ re at school or work take care of your diabetes when you ’ re at school or at work : follow your healthy eating plan . take your medicines and check your blood glucose levels as usual . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . keep snacks nearby and carry some with you at all times to treat low blood glucose . if you have trained diabetes staff at your school or work , tell them that you have diabetes . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . when you ’ re away from home these tips can help you when you ’ re away from home : get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you ’ re going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . follow your healthy eating plan as much as possible when you eat out . always carry a snack with you in case you have to wait for a waiter to serve you . limit alcoholic beverages . ask your health care team how many alcoholic beverages you can safely drink . eat something when you drink to prevent low blood glucose . if you ’ re taking a long trip by car , check your blood glucose levels before driving . stop and check your blood glucose levels every 2 hours . always carry your diabetes medicines and supplies in the car where you can reach them in case your blood glucose levels drop too low . in case you can ’ t leave for home on time , bring twice the amount of diabetes supplies and medicines you normally need . take comfortable , well-fitting shoes on vacation . you ’ ll probably be walking more than usual . keep your medical insurance card , emergency phone numbers , and a first aid kit handy . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . if you ’ re going to be away for a long time , ask your doctor for a written prescription for your diabetes medicines and the name of a doctor in the place you ’ re going to visit . don ’ t count on buying extra supplies when you ’ re traveling , especially if you ’ re going to another country . different countries use different kinds of diabetes medicines . when you ’ re flying on a plane these tips can help you when you ’ re flying on a plane : ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines , especially your insulin , if you ’ re traveling across time zones . take a letter from your doctor stating you have diabetes . the letter should include a list of all the medical supplies and medicines you need on the plane . in the letter , the doctor should also include a list of any devices that shouldn ’ t go through an x-ray machine . carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . if you use an insulin pump , ask airport security to check the device by hand . x-ray machines can damage insulin pumps , whether the pump is on your body or in your luggage . when on a plane , get up from your seat and walk around when possible . read more about planning for travel and travel safety if you have diabetes in have diabetes . will travel . at bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . action steps if you take insulin when you travel , take a special insulated bag to carry your insulin to keep it from freezing or getting too hot bring extra supplies for taking insulin and testing your blood glucose levels in case of loss or breakage ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for taking insulin and testing blood glucose action steps if you don ’ t take insulin when you travel , ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines if you ’ re traveling across time zones carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for testing blood glucose when an emergency or a natural disaster happens everyone with diabetes should be prepared for emergencies and natural disasters , such as power outages or hurricanes . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes , such as a blood glucose meter , lancets , and testing strips your diabetes medicines insulin , syringes , and an insulated bag to keep insulin cool , if you take insulin a glucagon kit if you take insulin or if recommended by your doctor glucose tablets and other food or drinks to treat low blood glucose antibiotic cream or ointment a copy of your medical information , including a list of your conditions , medicines , and recent lab test results a list of your prescription names with dosage information and prescription numbers from your pharmacy phone numbers for the american red cross and other disaster relief groups you also might want to include some food that doesn ’ t spoil , such as canned or dried food , along with bottled water . read more about preparing for an emergency at the centers for disease control and prevention emergency preparedness and you website at preparedness . if you ’ re a woman and planning a pregnancy keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . even before you become pregnant , your blood glucose levels should be close to the normal range . your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you ’ re already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . you can take steps to bring your blood glucose levels close to normal . your insulin needs may change when you ’ re pregnant . your doctor may want you to take more insulin and check your blood glucose levels more often . if you plan to have a baby , work with your health care team to get your blood glucose levels as close to the normal range as possible see a doctor who has experience taking care of pregnant women with diabetes dont smoke , drink alcoholic beverages , or use harmful drugs follow your healthy eating plan be sure to have your eyes , heart and blood vessels , blood pressure , and kidneys checked . your doctor should also check for nerve damage . pregnancy can make some health problems worse . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what i need to know about preparing for pregnancy if i have diabetes at your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you ’ re already pregnant , see your doctor right away . your diabetes care records make copies of the charts in this section . these charts list important things you should discuss with your doctor at each visit . things to discuss with your health care team at each visit date : whom you visited : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood glucose levels share your blood glucose records . your doctor will ask how you are checking your blood glucose levels to make sure you are doing it right . mention if you often have low or high blood glucose . shared blood glucose records ? checked meter ? practiced blood glucose reading ? shared high or low blood glucose ? your weight talk about how much you should weigh . talk about ways to reach your target weight that will work for you.my weight now is . my target weight is . steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood pressure ask about ways to reach your target . the target for most people with diabetes is below 140/80 unless your doctor helps you set a different target . my blood pressure now is . my target blood pressure is . steps to take : your medicines talk about any problems you have had with your medicines . ask if you should take a low-dose aspirin every day to lower your chance of getting heart disease . shared medicine problems ? take aspirin ? yes no steps to take : your feet ask to have your feet checked for problems . talk about any problems you are having with your feet , such as numbness , tingling , or sores that heal slowly . checked feet ? shared problems ? steps to help with my feet : your physical activity plan talk about how often you are physically active , the type of physical activity you do , and any problems you have when being physically active . shared activities ? steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your healthy eating plan talk about what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat . shared eating habits ? steps to take : your feelings if you feel stressed , ask about ways to cope . talk about whether you are feeling sad . shared stress and problems ? steps to take : your smoking if you smoke , ask for help with quitting . shared smoking habits ? steps to take : this chart lists important tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year . tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year test instruction results or dates a1 ctest have this blood test at least twice a year . your result will tell you what your average blood glucose level was for the past 2 to 3 months . date : a1 c : next test : blood lipid ( fats ) lab tests get a blood test to check your total cholesterol aim for below 200 ldl , or bad , cholesterol aim for below 100 hdl , or good , cholesterol men : aim for above 40 ; women : aim for above 50 triglycerides aim for below 150 date : total cholesterol : ldl : hdl : triglycerides : next test : kidney function tests once a year , get a urine test to check for protein . at least once a year , get a blood test to check for creatinine . date : urine protein : creatinine : next test : test instructions results or dates dilated eye exam see an eye doctor once a year for a complete eye exam that includes using drops in your eyes to dilate your pupils . if you are pregnant , have a complete eye exam in your first 3 months of pregnancy . have another complete eye exam 1 year after your baby is born . date : result : next test : dental exam see your dentist twice a year for a cleaning and checkup . date : result : next test : pneumonia vaccine ( recommended by the centers for disease control and prevention cdc ) get the vaccine if you are younger than 64. if you ’ re older than 64 and your shot was more than 5 years ago , get another vaccine . date received : test instructions results or dates flu vaccine ( recommended by the cdc ) get a flu shot each year . date received : hepatitis b vaccine ( recommended by the cdc ) get this vaccine if you are age 19 to 59 and have not had this vaccine . consider getting this vaccine if you are 60 or older and have not had this vaccine . date of 1st dose : date of 2nd dose : date of 3rd dose : 55 daily diabetes record page week starting other blood glucose breakfast blood glucose medicine lunch blood glucose medicine dinner blood glucose medicine bedtime blood glucose medicine notes : ( special events , sick days , exercise ) monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday you can also find a food and activity tracker at points to remember diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin . type 2 diabetes develops when , over time , the pancreas doesnt make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . people who are overweight and inactive are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it doesn ’ t make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you ’ re sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you don ’ t have enough insulin in your body . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . if you have severe hypoglycemia , youll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you ’ re sick . you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you ’ re going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . when traveling , carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes in the disaster kit . keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . if you ’ re already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . background : diabetes is increasing at an alarming rate in asian countries including the philippines . both the prevalence and incidence of type diabetes ( t2d ) continue to increase with a commensurate upward trend in the prevalence of prediabetes . objectives : the aim of this study was to review the prevalence of diabetes in the philippines and to describe extensively the characteristics of diabetes care in the philippines from availability of diagnostics tests to the procurement of medications . methods : a literature search was performed using the search words diabetes care and philippines . articles that were retrieved were reviewed for relevance and then synthesized to highlight key features . findings : the prevalence of diabetes in the philippines is increasing . rapid urbanization with increasing dependence on electronic gadgets and sedentary lifestyle contributes significantly to this epidemic . diabetes care in the philippines is disadvantaged and challenged with respect to resources , government support , and economics . the national insurance system does not cover comprehensive diabetes care in a preventive model and private insurance companies only offer limited diabetes coverage . thus , most patients rely on out-of-pocket expenses , namely , laboratory procedures and daily medications . consequently , poor pharmacotherapy adherence impairs prevention of complications . moreover , behavioral modifications are difficult due to cultural preferences for a traditional diet of refined sugar , including white rice and bread . conclusions : translating clinical data into practice in the philippines will require fundamental and transformative changes that increase diabetes awareness , emphasize lifestyle change while respecting cultural preferences , and promote public policy especially regarding the health insurance system to improve overall diabetes care and outcomes . keywords : diabetes , diabetes care , philippines , southeast asia , type 2 diabetes 2015. introduction : diabetes is a chronic disease and is increasing in both prevalence and incidence worldwide . diabetes exerts a major impact in third-world countries , particularly in the philippines . it is said that asia will see the greatest increase in the number of people with diabetes by 2025. this increase in the burden of chronic diseases in asia will significantly affect nations respective health care systems , both acutely and chronically . the philippines is located in southeast asia situated in the western pacific ocean . it is made up of 7101 islands and has approximately 115,831 square miles of total land area , and with a coastline of 22,549 miles , it is considered the fifth longest coastline in the world . three prominent bodies of water surround the archipelago namely , the pacific ocean on the east , the south china sea on the west and north , and the celebes sea on the south . the topography of the larger islands is characterized by rolling hills and high mountains , whereas the smaller islands are mountainous in the interior , surrounded by at low lands , which constitute the coastal rims . each island is accessed via sea transportation using larger vessels or smaller boats , the latter referred to by the natives as bancas . there are about 14 regions , 73 provinces , and 60 cities across the archipelago . therefore , individuals from smaller cities must traverse by land and sea to receive medical care in tertiary hospitals located in major cities . the philippines is unique in that filipinos in different regions of the country speak different dialects but all filipinos can speak one national language called tagalog . the philippines has an estimated population of approximately 101 million as of 2015 and is categorized by the world bank as a lower to middle income country and by the united nations as a country with a developing economy . the gross domestic product of the philippines real growth rate averaged 7.3 % in a report in 2007 , the highest in 31 years . in 2014 , the economy of the philippines grew from 6.1 % in 2014 to 6.5 % in 2015 fueled by sustained increases in private consumption , higher fixed investment , and recovery in exports . the challenge for the government is how to make these economic gains felt among the poorer sectors of society . the recent 2014 poverty incidence stands around 25.8 % . this latest figure is lower than the 2006 recorded official poverty statistic of 26.9 % .5 thus , with eco- nomic growth and decreasing poverty , the philippine government is realigning the national budget to improve social services . more specifically , this will allow an effective population management program focusing on education and healthcare . noncommunicable diseases ( ncd ; noninfectious or nontransmissible diseases ) including diabetes in the philippines account for 6 of the top 10 causes of mortality and are considered a major public health concern . diseases of the heart and vascular system continue to be the leading causes of death , comprising 31 % of all deaths . other ncds include malignant neoplasms , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and chronic kidney disease . what is alarming is that as deaths due to preventable diseases have been on a decline , lifestyle-related diseases due to westernization of the culture have begun to dominate as the leading causes of death , particularly due to cardiovascular diseases , malignant neoplasms , diabetes , and chronic lower respiratory diseases . at present , there are no published nationwide prevalence or incidence studies on type 1 diabetes ( t1d ) . however , 1 survey was done in a municipality of bulacan in central luzon region that showed a very low prevalence of t1d with only 7 cases diagnosed among children aged 0 to 14 years during a 10-year period from 1989 to 1998. a recent survey on pediatric type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) in the philippines also found a low prevalence at 0.91 % . as a result of the low prevalence of t1d , continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) devices and continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion ( insulin pumps ) are not widely used . standard home glucose monitoring devices are readily available and affordable as well as various insulin preparations that are generic and biosimilar via subcutaneous injections . there is little research on stem cell therapy or islet cell transplantation for t1d in the philippines . gestational diabetes ( gdm ) is prevalent in the philippines . published data from the asian federation of endocrine societies study group on diabetes in pregnancy ( asgodip ) showed that the philippines has a gdm prevalence of 14 % in 1203 pregnancies surveyed . because of this high prevalence rate , the unite for diabetes clinical practice guideline ( cpg ) recommends universal gdm screening for the filipino population . the asgodip data found that about 40.4 % of high-risk women were positive for gdm when screening was performed beyond the 26th week of pregnancy . in a cohort of filipino women with gdm delivering babies with macrosomia in the cardinal santos medical center , > 75 % were diagnosed between gestational weeks 26 and 38. in another cohort population from the veterans memorial medical center , 50 % of gdm cases were diagnosed between gestational weeks 31 and 40. the filipino cpg recommends adopting the criteria by the international association of diabetes & pregnancy study groups for interpretation of the 75-g oral glucose tolerance test as gdm screening . t2d is the most common type of diabetes in the philippines . in 2009 , a cohort study derived from the larger population-based investigation in 1998 was revisited and demonstrated a 9-year incidence rate of t2d in the philippines to be around 16.3 % . in the latest survey published by the food and nutrition research institute in the philippines ( the eighth national nutrition survey of 2013 ) , the prevalence of high fasting blood glucose based on the world health organization criteria of > 125 mg/dl for individuals > 20 years old was 5.4 % , an increase of 0.6 % , compared with the same study in 2008. the highest prevalence rate was found among the richest in the wealth index , those living in urban areas , and those in the 60- to 69-year age group in both sexes . these studies show an alarming growth rate of t2d in the philippines commensurate with an upward trend in worldwide prevalence . in the 2014 prevalence estimates published by the international diabetes federation , it is estimated that there are 3.2 million cases of t2d in the philippines with a 5.9 % prevalence rate in adults between the ages of 20 and 79 years . around 1.7 million people with t2d remain undiagnosed . the estimated cost per person with t2 din 2013 in the philippines is $ 205 , which is comparable with neighboring countries such as thailand ( $ 285 ) and indonesia ( $ 174.7 ) . the health care system in the pjilippines : the philippines has a very low physician-to- household ratio . as of 2002 , it was estimated that there were only 12 physicians per 10,000 house-holds , although there were more nurses available , at 61 per 10,000 filipino households . the philippines government health care insurance company philhealth provides benefits for diabetes-related admissions . this is a government corporation that aims to ensure universal health insurance for all filipinos . in 2014 , based on the philhealth circular no . 17s 2014 , new implementing guidelines were released for outpatient coverage for medications for hypertension , diabetes , and dyslipidemia . the stated rationale for this coverage is considering the increasing burden of ncds vis-a-vis the cost of maintenance drugs for these diseases , philhealth primary care benefit 2 package ( pcb2 ) will pay for outpatient medicines for philhealth qualified members or dependents with hypertension , diabetes and dyslipidemia long before their conditions become catastrophic . indigent and sponsored members or their dependents are eligible for the package but only one recipient per family with a 10-year cardiovascular risk of > 30 % can avail of the pcb2 at one time . limited medications were included in the coverage for diabetes , namely only the sulfonylurea glibenclamide and the biguanide metformin , provided on a monthly basis . a price cap , as agreed on with philhealth , is reimbursed to the package provider . these guidelines are obviously superior to no provisions for diabetes medical outpatient care . however , the guidelines are still not sufficiently comprehensive , as reimbursements for medications and overall health coverage remain limited for each family household . philhealth also provides hospitalization benefits but only in accredited institutions with a ceiling price for each diagnosis and procedure . the majority of outpatient services continue to be out- of-pocket expenses unless patients have their own health insurance under the health medical organization system , generally as part of employees benefits while working in private institutions . in effect , the national insurance system is limited and does not cover comprehensive diabetes care in a preventive care model , and moreover , that private insurance companies only offer limited diabetes coverage placing the overall care model at a distinct disadvantage . diabetes clinics in several government hospitals offer free consultations and affordable medicines for the underprivileged . additionally , most city governments also have city health centers , which are called barangay health units . these units offer basic primary health care deliveries . a barangay is the smallest administrative unit of the government in the philippines and is similar to a village . it is at barangay health stations ( bhs ) where health care professionals ( hcps ) are expected to deliver basic diabetes self-management and perform basic measures , such as blood pressure and body mass index calculations . in the city ( or provincial ) health offices , diabetes clubs are established . private-paying individuals receive their outpatient diabetes consultations in tertiary hospital settings where they have a choice of specialists trained in endocrinology , diabetes , and metabolism certified by the philippine society of endocrinology diabetes and metabolism . at present , there are only 7 training institutions accredited by the philippine society of endocrinology , diabetes and metabolism ( psedm ) that provide about 30 certified endocrinologists every year with the balance of diabetologists trained under the auspices of the institute for diabetes foundation . availability of medications : the philippines government has implemented reforms to make diabetes medications readily available and affordable to all filipinos . the philippines generics act of under republic act no . 6675 was passed mainly to improve the supply of medicines for hcps , specifically allowing importation , manufacturing , and encouragement of generics instead of branded medicines . likewise , the philippines department of health established the national drug policy pharmaceutical management unit , or pharma 50 , to reduce prices of medicines by 50 % through parallel drug importation . 24 local government units also have the botika ng barangay ( pharmacy of the village ) program that caters to marginalized underserved communities by providing affordable over-the-counter and selected pre-scription medications at very low prices . in 2008 , the universally accessible cheaper and quality medicines act no . 9502 was passed , which granted the government the power to regulate medicine prices and ensure quality affordable medicines through the bureau of food and drugs . most diabetes medications , both oral antidiabetic ( oad ) and injectable such as insulin and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists ( glp1-ra ) , are available in the philippines . most of the off-patent diabetes medications are now available as generics . in a 2012 publication , the diabcare study looking at t2d , assessed the status of diabetes care in the philippines and found that of the total sample population , approximately 78.5 % of the patients were on oad , whereas 42 % were on insulin . 27 of the oads , biguanides followed by sulfonylureas were the most frequently prescribed . this practice is understandable considering that these 2 medications are the most cost-effective in the philippines since generic equivalents are readily available and therefore very affordable to the public sector . it is understandable that metformin is frequently prescribed , but the continued prevalence of sulfonylurea prescription in light of deprioritization in virtually all diabetes cpg ( due to high rates of hypoglycemia ) highlights the dominant and continued role of economics as a driver of diabetes care . the most commonly prescribed insulin preparation was the premixed insulin accounting for 43 % , followed by basal insulin ( detemir or glargine ) accounting for 26 % . half of the patients who were on insulin were using the newer insulin analog preparations for both basal and bolus injections , while the remaining half were on the usual human nph and r insulin preparations . almost half of the patients on insulin were using pen devices ; the remaining half were using insulin via a syringe . based on the questionnaire given , approximately two-thirds of patients were still worried about starting insulin therapy . data on metabolic control : the mean hemoglobin a1c ( a1c ) in the 2008 study was 8.03 % which is slightly better than the same survey done in 2003 where the mean a1c was 8.9 % . only approximately 15 % of the patients in the study achieved the target a1c goal of < 7.0 % from the american diabetes association . blood glucose self-monitoring is considered a mainstay in the treatment of diabetes because it has been shown to assist in improving glycemic control . unfortunately , due to economic pressures and a basic lack of disease awareness , the majority of patients choose to buy t2d medication instead of paying for test strips . however , increased aware-ness of the disease and increased physician education regarding the benefits of home glucose monitoring may have improved the utilization of glucose monitoring over time . hence , compared with the earlier 2008 diabcare survey , there was considerable improvement in the number of patients who reported self-monitoring from 16.1 % in 2003to 46.5 % in 2008. this supports the role of diligent diabetes education among filipino patients with diabetes to optimize glucose control . metabolic control measures are an important component of comprehensive , complications- centric diabetes care . results of one study found that 94 % of patients in the philippines with t2d had dyslipidemia , but only 53 % of these patients . available diabetes medications in the philippines : class drug biguanides metformin sulfonylureas glibenclamide , glipizide , gliclazide , glimipride a-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose ddpivinhibitors sitagliptin , saxagliptin , vildagliptin , linagliptin glp1 receptor agonists liraglutide , exenatide , lixisenatide sglt2 inhibitors dapaglifozin , empagli ozin , canagli ozin pending insulins human insulin r , mix 70/30 , nph , glulisine , insulin aspart , detemir , glargine , degludec . diabetes care in the philippines received treatment with statins . along these lines , hypertension was found in 68 % of patients , but only 64 % were treated with antihypertensive medications , where angiotensin receptor blockers were the drugs most commonly used . the study authors concluded that the status of diabetes care in the philippines appears below the accepted standards and calls for urgent measures to improve the delivery of quality care among patients with t2d . among newly diagnosed patients with t2d in the philippines , 20 % already had peripheral neuropathy , 42 % had proteinuria , and 2 % had diabetic retinopathy upon consultation . this study sug- gests that diabetes awareness in the philippines is also far from ideal . diabetes programs diabetes awareness campaigns have always been at the forefront of activities among diabetes organization in the philippines , including the psedm , the institute for diabetes foundation ( idsf ) , diabetes philippines ( dp ) , american association of clinical endocrinologists philippines ( aacephilippines ) , and the philippine center for diabetes education foundation ( pcdef ) . diabetes aware-ness month is celebrated every july with concurrent activities nationwide , including many lay forum events . the department of health also reserves every fourth week of july in its yearly calendar for a diabetes awareness campaign . additionally , general practitioners and internal medicine specialists regularly attend diabetes workshops by these organizations to optimize care in underserved regions . availability and affordability of laboratory tests : most of the important laboratory tests including a1 care available in most tertiary hospitals in major cities of the philippines . however , standardization of this a1c as say according to the dcct ( diabetes control and complications trial ) or ngsp ( originally referred to as the national glycohemoglobin standardization program in 1996 ) certification can not be accurately established . it is for this reason that the uni ed cpg established by the unite for diabetes philippines ( made up of > 20 specialties ) state that a1c can not be used in the philippines to diagnose diabetes because of lack of standardization . the philippines cpg recommends that only fasting plasma glucose , random plasma glucose , and 2-hour glucose using oralglucose tolerance testing should be used as tests for diagnosing diabetes . however the cpgrecom- mends a1c measurement for glucose control monitoring . another problem with a1 cis that it is not readily available in public hospitals and health centers , further limiting the ability to monitor glycemic status and achieve optimal diabetes care . a major concern for the general public is the high cost of laboratory testing for comprehensive evaluation of patients with diabetes . a comprehensive panel including the complete blood count , a1c fasting blood sugar , blood urea nitrogen , creatinine , serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase , lipid pro le , urinalysis , and urine albumin/creatinine ratio will cost approximately $ 45 in a private hospital laboratory or outpatient diagnostic center . without out patient medical insurance , these and other laboratory costs are out-of-pocket expenses . for perspective , this cost is 3 to 4 times more than the average daily earning of a working filipino . as of 2010 , the aver-age daily pay for a domestic worker in the philippines is only p132.60 or roughly us $ 3 per day . in comparative wage studies of different countries , as of 2015 , the calculated average monthly wage of a filipino worker is only $ 174.67 to $ 242.60 . 35 poverty continues to be a major part of this challenge , affecting both the financial and socio economic fronts . the national poverty index of the philippines as of 2014 continues to be high and hovers around 25.8 % , with many of the poorest still in curring out-of-pocket expenses . therefore , the high cost of laboratory evaluation represents a clear disincentive for outpatient follow-up and another factor contributing to suboptimal care . family support on the bright side , a distinctive feature among filipinos is the strong family unit . parents are taken care of by family members up to the time of their death . having diabetes is not being discriminated by family members but instead receives very strong family support . elderly parents are always accompanied by family members to outpatient clinic visits . financial burden from medicines to laboratories are all shouldered and shared by siblings . single children are expected to continue help the household expenses until they are married . nursing homes are not in practice in the philippines and therefore chronic disease supportive measures , such as with diabetes and its complications , are provided by family members until the patients death . mankind knows diabetes mellitus since ages . indian medical history mentions madhumeha in charak samhita ( 500-700 bc ) and has given description of this disorder in detail . the following shlok describes symptoms of diabetes . charak mentions a madhumehi person passes large amount of sweet urine . in spite of knowing the disease for so long the reaction of the patient at the time of diagnosis remains almost the same . the moment of diagnosis brings a lot of unnecessary despair . it is frightening to the patient . but most of the times this reaction is due to misconception about the disease . india is going to be a country with largest diabetes population by year 2025. what is diabetes ? millions of people have diabetes . even children suffer from this disease . that is why i feel that you are fortunate that your disease has been diagnosed at right time . this is one of the most widely studied , researched and advance areas in the medical field . at present there is no cure in any of the pathies for this disease . but with modern medical advancement you can definitely live near normal healthy life . we are here to add life to your life . we care for you and for your diabetes . your cooperation is mandatory because a diabetic who knows the most about his disease faces least problems . in any disease it is said that half the battle is won by confidence and i intend to give you confidence in this booklet , confidence to live with the disease gracefully and confidence to tackle your problems intelligently . let us start with the basic question i.e . what is diabetes ? glucose is essential for providing energy for normal body functions . in diabetes the blood glucose levels are increased due to relative or absolute deficiency of insulin . insulin is a hormone . a hormone is a chemical secreted by one of the glands in our body . this gland is situated in abdomen and is known as pancreas . insulin acts as a gatekeeper that allows entry of glucose into the cell . if the amount of insulin is abnormal or the function of insulin is at fault excess of glucose accumulates in the body with harmful effects on the cells of various organs . diabetes is a metabolic disorder in which body is unable to handle glucose for its energy requirements . as we have already discussed , insulin is essential for entry of glucose in to the cell that is why : cells can not adequately utilise glucose , so body tries to produce more glucose ( gluconeogenesis ) . this is how blood glucose keeps on rising even if there is no food intake . there are two major types of diabetes . the first type i.e . insulin dependent diabetes . it can be treated only with insulin as the main drug . this is common in younger age group of patients . the second type is non-insulin dependent diabetes ( type ii ) . this is more common in india . this usually affects people above 40 years of age . this group can be managed with diet , exercises and oral medications . some patients in this group may require insulin sometime later in life . uncontrolled diabetes can lead to deleterious effects on every part of the body if not looked after well at the right time . even if one may not , in actual sense suffer the consequences of the disease today , it needs to be adequately treated . complacency and neglect is always dangerous . remember that the disease has to be well controlled as it is critical in leading a normal life . poorly controlled diabetes can be a major aggravating factor for later diabetes complications . following chart shows some of these complication risks . this is only to make you aware how important it is to control diabetes and not to scare you about this disease . let us understand how this disease starts making its impression on your life . usually , disease creeps in silently . one comes to know of it generally during routine blood sugar test for getting licenses , insurance etc . sometimes it is detected only during treatment of other concomitant illness or before surgery . following are the common manifestations of diabetes . report as a surprise , increased appetite and thirst , significant weightloss , infections in folds , increased urination , and exhaustion . who should test themselves for diabetes ? everybody with above mentioned symptoms . close relatives of diabetes patients . for type 1 diabetes hereditary factor is less prominent . if a father is diabetic then the risk to the child is 5-10 % . if a mother is diabetic then the risk is 5 % . type 2 or niddm has significant genetic predisposition . if one parent has diabetes the risk is 40 % . if both parents are diabetic the risk is 90 % . pregnant women diabetes is not uncommon due to various hormonal and metabolic changes during pregnancy . those having high blood pressure , obesity , heart disease and paralysis etc . a lady who delivered a baby weighing more than 4.5 kg . all above 45 years of age should check their sugar level once in a year . how is diabetes detected ? estimation and interpretation of blood glucose is the only test for diagnosis of diabetes . world health organization ( who ) has laid down guidelines for diagnosis . criteria for diagnosis of diabetes fasting venous plasma glucose > 140 mg/100ml and two hours after 75 gm ingestion of glucose > 200 mg /100ml recently , american diabetes association has accepted the fasting plasma glucose values as > 126mg/100ml for diagnosis of diabetes . how to prepare for blood test ? how one should prepare for the blood test is also very important . the person should have normal diet 3-4 days prior to the test . please do not try to reduce sugar intake purposely just to show less blood sugar values . by this , one is not only fooling the doctor but oneself also . actually you are delaying the diagnosis which may prove very costly later . we want to diagnose the disease so as to take correct measures to control it at the earliest time . you should remember that by checking sugar levels doctors are not making you a patient but trying to avoid serious complications related to high sugars . at the time of blood test the person should be fasting overnight . he can have water.the next morning fasting blood glucose sample is collected . two hours after 75g of glucose load or lunch second blood glucose sample is collected . another way is , to give post lunch plasma sample on one day and to give fasting glucose sample next morning . a known diabetic patient is supposed to follow the normal daily routine on the day of blood test also . that means the timings of breakfast , medicines and the lunch should be followed on this day as usual . the doctor can do any modification in the drug and the doses if the patient follows a regular schedule on the blood test day . diabetes management for each person is different . do not compare your doses and drugs with other patients . management of diabetes is not only sugar control but much more beyond that . your doctor knows your system very well . he will decide what is best for you . feel free to ask all your queries to your doctor . controlling diabetes . what is the idea of control in diabetes ? basic idea of control is that the person should get relief from the symptoms also , blood biochemistry must be in an acceptable range so as to avoid acute and long-term complications due to uncontrolled disease . it is important to know the fact that though the blood biochemistry prescribes normal range of values , they may be little more or less without causing any alarm signals . hence one should be aware of the concept of acceptable controls . the management will depend upon overall health of the patient and certainly not on blood reports ! regular medical examination includes : monthly weight record , blood pressure check up , blood glucose testing , complete lipid profile , urine and blood tests for assessing kidney functions , tests for evaluation of heart disease , examination of eyes , evaluation of diabetic foot changes , and any sexual problems . other specialized tests can be suggested depending upon results of tests mentioned above and the clinical examination by the specialist . diabetes care schedule : every 3-6 months : regular visits to your doctor , it includes - test for plasma glucose levels , glycated hemoglobin test ( such as hba1c ) , examination of injection site , feet : examined without shoes and socks . every year : cholesterol : fasting profile including hdl & ldl cholesterol and triglycerides , kidneys : microalbumin measured , eyes : examined through dilated pupils . every 2-3 years : hdl/cholesterol : if the last reading was normal , number of visits to the doctor depend on the control of blood sugar . myths about diabetes to help separate fact from fiction , here are some of the myths and the actual truth about diabetes . all diabetes is inherited : not everyone who gets diabetes inherits it . people tend to inherit the risk of niddm diabetes more than iddm . you are considered at risk for developing niddm if any first-degree relatives have diabetes . people with diabetes should never eat sugar and sweets : sugar and sweets do raise your blood glucose , but people with diabetes can safely eat sugar as part of their meal plan in their recommended quota of calories occasionally . and just to clear up another myth , you can ’ t get diabetes from eating too much sugar if you don ’ t carry any other risk factor for its development . you can have borderline diabetes for many years : there is no such thing as borderline diabetes . you either have it , or you don ’ t . you have diabetes if , your fasting blood glucose levels are greater than 126 mg/dl , or the random blood glucose is above 200 mg/dl on at least two occasions . once you start taking pills or insulin , you can eat anything that you want : the pills or insulin that you take for diabetes are more effective when they don ’ t have to work as hard to lower your blood glucose . combining your medicines with a healthy meal plan and physical activity is the best method of control of diabetes . insulin causes impotence : some men who have diabetes may become impotent , but not because they take insulin . impotence or erectile dysfunction is caused by damage to nerves caused by longstanding high blood glucose . diabetes is one of the many reasons for getting impotence.the best way to judge your blood sugar level is by the way that you feel : some people have symptoms when their blood glucose is too high or low , others do not . because some of the symptoms of high and low blood glucose are similar , it can be hard to know what your symptoms mean . the only way to be sure is to check your blood glucose . if my blood sugar is usually over 180 mg/dl that must be normal for me : no . your usual blood glucose isn ’ t the same as normal blood glucose . just because your blood glucose is usually high , does not mean that this is an acceptable blood glucose level . high blood glucose levels that are above those recommended goals do damage to many organs and systems in your body . the doctor has prescribed me insulin . however i do not feel sick at all . so i would better postpone taking insulin at a later date : for some people with type 2 diabetes , especially those who are obese , moderate weight loss and increased physical activity can lower blood glucose levels so significantly , that insulin injections are not necessary . but bargaining like this is bad for your health ! when you put off insulin even for a few months , high blood glucose levels can be doing a lot of damage . instead , start insulin as soon as it is recommended so that you can keep your blood glucose in control . at the same time you can focus on losing weight and exercising more , with the hope that this will help to reduce your body ’ s need for insulin injections in the future . “ my diabetes is much more serious than some people because i have to take insulin injection while others do not take it ” . many people avoid insulin because they believe it is a good way to keep their diabetes from becoming too “ serious . ” when you really think about it , that seems silly , doesn ’ t it ? if your blood glucose levels are high , whether you are taking insulin or not , the problem is serious and needs to be addressed . if you avoid insulin it doesn ’ t make the high blood glucose less serious , it just makes it easier for you to ignore the problem . certainly when you begin taking insulin , your diabetes does not suddenly become more serious . rather , you are now using a new and powerful tool to address a problem that has been serious all along . it would be a beginning towards a better life . type 2 or niddm diabetes is not serious : this is never true . all types of diabetes are serious , and need to be taken seriously by people who have it and their families . “ the first prescription of insulin is the prescription for rest of your life ” : it is true that most people who take insulin continue to do so for the rest of their lives . but does it really matter ? taking insulin injection is certainly not like an addiction to drugs or narcotics . you are always in control of what you are doing and it is for running your body system correctly . some people do manage to make the necessary lifestyle changes so that insulin can be safely discontinued without a rise in blood glucose levels . there is definitely no point in avoiding one or two pricks of injection at the cost of your life . now you have some idea about your disease . the golden rule of diabetes care is that “ you are the most important person even more that the doctor in management of diabetes ” . management of diabetes can best be described under following steps . diet , exercise , oral medication , and insulin injection . diet in diabetes . this means that many diseases and symptoms are managed by proper diet . even hundreds of medicines may not work or show effect unless certain rules regarding diet are adhered to . this is the most important area in the management of the disease . you have lots of people other than the doctor in your periphery to prescribe your diet . but remember that you are going to decide your diet in consultation with your doctor and the dietician . you may be bothered with lots of “ don ’ ts ” . but you will realize that you can eat practically everything provided you know what you are eating and how much you are eating . traditional indian diet with little modification is “ ideal diabetic diet ” . diabetic diet does not deprive you of many foodstuffs . you do not have to make major changes in your food habits in particular and life style in general other than avoid sugars ( mainly sweets ) and quantity of fat in your daily diet . you need to be just little more disciplined in limiting your food intakes . you can eat everything in your allotted quota of calories in consultation with your doctor and dietician . you can eat rice , potatoes , fruits etc . as other people . one fruit per day can be eaten without any problems . you just need to get carbohydrates , proteins , fats and vitamins in right proportion . remember that strict but unsupervised diet control can also be more harmful.depending on your ideal body weight and calorie requirement diet can be tailor-made for you . the design of the plan can easily be made by keeping in mind your likes and dislikes . you can have variety of food in “ exchange food plan ” . your doctor and dietician can be consulted for this innovation . diet control does not mean weight reduction . some diabetics need to gain weight . this can be done under your doctor ’ s guidance . remember do not add too much oil as cooking medium . do not add sugar or jaggery in vegetable preparations . have in ample amount whenever you feel hungry . salads : cucumber , cabbage , lettuce , onion , tomato , capsicum , and radish . plain lemon juice with water . clear soups ( without additives like starch or bread pieces ) . thin buttermilk without cream or sugar . sprouted cereals . what you should avoid ? jams , jellies , soft drinks . sugar , jaggery , honey . oily foodstuff . fried food . alcohol and other beverages . concentrated sweets . fasting for any reason . yellow part of egg . liver , kidney and brain parts in non-vegetarian food . prawns . what you should restrict ? oil consumption . salt . why salt should be restricted ? diabetics are more prone to get high blood pressure and heart diseases . since these disorders are also related to the dietary conditions , you will have to strike a correct balance of different components of food . you can make food palatable with reduced salt by adding tamarind , garlic , fresh lime , onion , dry mango powder ( aamchur ) etc . vegetable exchange ( 40 calories ) cabbage , cucumber , cauliflower , brinjol , tomato , lady ’ s finger , beans , padwal , drumsticks , pumpkin , methi , radish . ( 1/2 - 3/4 vati cooked ) carrot , beet root , green peas , suran , potato . non vegeterian food ( 70 calories of 30 gms of each of the followings ) beef , lamb , pork , fish . chicken . ( avoid yellow part of egg , liver , kidney and brain parts , and prawns ) . dairy products ( 40 cal ) . milk ( from cow ) - 50ml . skimmed milk - 1 cup . curd - 1/2 vati . cheese - one cube small sized . paneer - 1 piece . fruits ( 50 cal ) banana 1/2 anjir . papaya 1/2 vati ( medium ) . peru ( guava ) . 1 orange . 1 pineapple . 1/2 vati . custard apple 1/2 dates 2-3 grapes 1 0 - 1 2 ( sitafal ) ( khajur ) . apple 1/2 peach 1 coconut 1/2 cup . water mango pieces 2 water 3/2 cup . it is obvious from these lists that you can enjoy wide variety of foods . your diet should not be monotonous . you are also entitled to delicious and varied food as other healthy individuals . artificial sweetner these are synthetically prepared agents . they are 200 to 300 times sweeter than sugar . these can be safely used in tea , coffee and even in preparing sweets . exercise is a medicine and fun too ! importance of exercise in the management of diabetes is given prominence in charak samhita in following shlok . this means that a lazy , obese person and a person who eats lots of fat is attacked by death very easily . exercise is an important aspect of diabetes management . how exactly does exercise help in diabetes control . it improves glucose control by peripheral utilization of glucose by tissues . it improves blood circulation , tones up your heart , lungs and other muscles , it helps you to keep healthy , it is fun and enjoyable , it helps to reduce weight , it increases physical stamina . a diabetic person without any associated complication can do any type of exercise . start the exercise programme with minimum time and intensity . then try to achieve the maximum within your limits . exercise should be done regularly for at least for 30-35 minutes per day & atleast 5 days a week . try to do the same exercise every day . no frequent exchange programme should be tried here . the exercise should not be changed in its intensity either as that will create problems . keep some sugar handy , to take care of hypoglycemia if it occurs . wear loose cotton clothes . do not exercise bare footed . brisk walk , jogging , cycling are good exercises . before starting the exercise programme discuss with your doctor for any special instructions . for many diabetics who have associated problems of foot or osteoarthritis walking may be difficult . they can consult the doctor for upper limb exercises or exercises in lying down position where weight bearing can be avoided . yogic exercises are also helpful . medication : in some patients diet control and exercises are not adequate for achieving acceptable blood glucose levels . these patients require medication either in the form of oral drugs or insulin injections . diet and exercise need to be continued as a part of treatment of diabetes . basically , oral medication is of following major types : sulfonylurea ( available commercially as daonil , glynase , euglucon and dimicron ) and biguinides ( marketed as glyciphase , walaphase ) . these have different modes of action . the doctor will decide the suitable type and dose of medicine . you may need one or more tablets if the control of your blood glucose is not possible by following a healthy eating plan or by being active . these tablets lower blood glucose , in different ways . for example , sulfonylurea lowers blood glucose by helping the pancreas make more insulin . sulfonylureas have to be taken half an hour before food . whereas , biguanides reduce blood glucose by decreasing the liver ’ s production of glucose . it also causes the muscle to use glucose more efficiently . the two other new types of medicines like acarbose and insulin sensitizers work in other ways . acarbose reduces absorption of glucose from intestine . it has to be taken just before first bite of lunch and dinner . these medicines have specific indications . it is again important to remind you at this stage that no two patients are similar . hence do not compare your doses or type of tablet with other patients . do not take tablets prescribed to some other patient when you run out of stock or while away from home . always carry sufficient quantity of your medicine with you . these tablets should be avoided in pregnancy , diabetes associated with severe heart diseases , kidney and liver diseases or young diabetics . after years of use sometimes oral medicine may not show required effects on blood sugar . this is called primary or secondary drug the patient may not respond to tablets then . this is because the oral drugs can work if the pancreas make enough to let the pills work . the pills do not stop working , the pancreas does . if the pancreas no longer make insulin then one must take insulin injection . remember what is most important is to control of blood sugar levels . eating healthy and staying active is still a must even if you are taking medicine . consider your oral drugs as “ extra help ” to control your blood glucose . more than likely you need to shed a few kilograms , improve your blood fats and blood pressure . healthy eating and exercise helps you achieve these goals as well . and if you lose enough weight you maybe able to take less tablets or no tablets at all . remember that it may only take a few kilos off your body to get rid of diabetes ! insulin-injection : insulin therapy there are misconceptions and phobia in minds of patients and sometimes even doctors about insulin . prescription of insulin does not mean that your disease is severe . any type of diabetes mellitus is a major illness . it needs to be treated with whatever possible means . the fear of insulin is due to its mode of delivery which is through injection . but with newer types of injection syringes and with right technique one can have minimum pain while taking the injection . insulin is needed by young diabetics , very high blood sugar levels , pregnant diabetic women , diabetics who have to undergo operative procedures and/or other serious illness , diabetics with associated complications like heart or kidney disease may require insulin in addition to oral tablets , infections like tuberculosis or hepatitis in presence of diabetes . never refuse to take insulin if your doctor advises . there are definitely more advantages of being on insulin therapy in certain situations . you have to take insulin in the form of an injection not because of the seriousness of the problem , but because it is the only mode by which insulin can be administered at the moment . types of insulin : two main types of insulin are available . the first type is fast acting . the action starts within 1/2 to 1 hour after taking it . hence it is taken 1/2 to 1 hour before consuming food . the second type is cloudy type of insulin . it is an intermediate acting insulin . the action starts 3-4 hours after injection and lasts for 18-20 hours . peak effect is seenafter 10-12 hours . both these insulins are available in premixed forms as well in different ratios to make it most convenient for the patient . insulin preservation : storage of insulin is very important for its optimum action . insulin should be stored preferably in fridge ( on the door at the bottom level ) . it should not be frozen . it should not be exposed to extreme temperatures like shelf near the cooking stove in the kitchen or geyser in the bathroom . constant sunlight at the windows can cause problem if the bottle of insulin has been left there . insulin can be kept safety for 15 - 30 days at room temperature in relatively cooler place also . how to prepare insulin shot ? wash your hands thoroughly . roll the insulin vial in both hands . do not shake it . take cloudy insulin or intermediate acting insulin vial . clean the top with a spirit swab . insert the needle in the vial and push air inside the vial , in an amount equal to units of insulin you are required to take . take out empty syringe without any insulin in it . now take vial of clear or rapid acting insulin . push air inside the vial , amount equal to units of your insulin dose . make vial-syringe unit upside down . just pull back the plunger to withdraw clear insulin . take out the needle . now insert needle in cloudy insulin vial . pull the piston back so that insulin flows inside the syringe without getting mixed inside the vial . remove air bubbles by firmly flicking the syringe . you are now ready with insulin shot . clean the area where you want to inject . pinch the skin fold . hold syringe like a pen with thumb and middle finger . press the plunger with index finger , straight in the skinfold . you have now injected successfully . injection device : insulin syringes are available in markets that are disposable and capable of offering near “ painfree ” injections . insulin portable pens , insulin jets and portable insulin pumps are also available . the pen like instruments are available now in the market which allow you to dial the dose and inject . these pens have following advantages : they assure a freedom from syringes , they are very accurate , and they increase the self-confidence of the patients and assure them a near normal social life . sites for insulin injection insulin injection is easy to take . hypoglycemia : hypoglycemia means sudden lowering of blood sugar . when you are on medication for diabetes , lowering of the blood sugar level is the normal expected response of the drug . this is not a side effect of the medicine but sometimes , for the reasons given below , this level of blood glucose is lowered significantly . how to recognise hypoglycemia ? following symptoms can be correlated with hypoglycemia . sudden feeling of hunger and cramps in stomach , unexplained uneasiness , sweating , headache , blurring of vision , tremulousness , palpitation , abnormal behaviour , sudden mood changes . if it is not treated at proper time it may progress to deterioration in consciousness , convulsions , paralysis and coma . all these symptoms of hypoglycemia are avoidable if it is treated immediately . causes of hypoglycemia : missed food , excess of diabetes medicine dose , sudden unaccustomed exercise , alcohol consumption . treatment of hypoglycemia : as soon as you get warning symptoms take sugar , fruit juice , chocolates or some sweets immediately . if it is left untreated patient may require injection of glucose or glucagon . report this event to the doctor so as to adjust doses of medicine . a glucometer is very handy to keep a record of glucose levels . it would help to monitor the hypoglycemic conditions as well . sick day plan : simple illnesses like viral fever , diarrhea , flu etc are as common in diabetics as in non-diabetic persons . when you are sick body releases hormones that help to fight against disease . but these hormones may raise blood glucose levels . if you are not having enough insulin to take care of this situation , body will release lot of ketone bodies . this can be very harmful.check your blood glucose and urine ketose more often when you are sick . do not skip total insulin dose or medicine even if you are not eating properly . do not exercise on a sick day . if the urine sugars are absent and ketone bodies are present , it ndicates starvation ketoses . you need to eat more and take more fluids in this situation . pregnancy and diabetes : all those related to the field of diabetology , as patient or as a health care professional should thank best and banting ( 1921 ) for their discovery of insulin . it was next to impossible for a pregnant diabetic woman to survive before availability of insulin . but now the scenario has totally changed . with medical advancement a diabetic lady can have a normal pregnancy and expect a normal child . its also possible for a nondiabetic pregnant woman to get diabetes during the course of her pregnancy . this entity is called as gestational diabetes and is not an uncommon occurrence . what is gestational diabetes mellitus ( gdm ) ? appearance of diabetes during the course of pregnancy is called as gdm . this condition is generally asymptotic . but it is a very serious condition if left untreated . uncontrolled diabetes is a major health hazard for both the mother and the baby in the womb . the good news is that if it is well managed , than the course of pregnancy and outcome is almost same as non-diabetic pregnancies . current recommendations are that all pregnant women must be screened for gestational diabetes between the 24th and 28th weeks of pregnancy . some important tips : if your diabetes is detected during pregnancy report to a diabetologist or an obstetrician immediately . diet control and exercises are initial steps in the management like other diabetic patients , but oral hypoglycemic tablets are not recommended during pregnancy . the oral drugs should be immediately stopped as soon as pregnancy is confirmed and patient should be switched over to insulin . temperatures like shelf near the cooking stove in the kitchen or geyser in the bathroom . constant sunlight at the windows can cause problem if the bottle of insulin has been left there . insulin can be kept safety for 15 - 30 days at room temperature in relatively cooler place also . if you are a known diabetic and planning to conceive keep your blood glucose as tightly controlled as possible . the diabetic woman in child bearing age group must plan family with doctor ’ s consultation with excellent blood glucose control throughout . some problems in the fetus and mothers are more common in diabetic pregnancies but if the sugar control is well , a normal pregnancy and delivery is possible . diabetes per se does not pose contraindication for child bearing . insulin and only insulin remains as a major treatment till delivery . the best insulin is human insulin . try to maintain fasting blood glucose levels between 70 to 90 mg/ dl and post prandial 100-135 mg/dl . through out preconception period and during pregnancy . you may have to do some special blood tests and frequent sonographic examinations during pregnancy for evaluation of normal foetal growth . diabetic ladies should avoid oral contraceptive tablets and use other barrier methods for contraception . diabetes and youth : no age is barred from getting attacked by diabetes , but diabetes at young age is a special condition . there are many physical , endocrinal and psychological changes taking place in young diabetic patients . their activities and food requirements are higher than adult patients . this type of diabetes needs only insulin for managemnet . the adolescent changes in the minds need to be understood by the parents and other family members . the managemnet becomes easier if the parents and the child have good rapport . counseling and psychiatric help is sometimes essential at this stage for better compliance . children should be given enough freedom regarding diet and activities but still be supervised . occupation , job , marriage and post-marriage events do not pose any problem in a well-controlled young diabetic patient . horizon is as open for these young people as it is for non-diabetic ones . self monitoring : self-monitoring means that the patient can monitor and maintain test results of urine and blood sugar examinations at home . it ’ s a novel concept so that you have maximum information about your health situation . urine can be examined for presence of sugars , proteins and ketones . sugar in urine does not carry much significance and blood sugar examination is the only confirmatory test . but it is better than doing nothing . commercially available urine strips are quite reliable and give useful information to the doctor . ketone body testing is most important in urine test . they are present in urine when dm control is very poor and body is under severe metabolic stress . it is an emergency situation . home blood glucose monitoring is an important examination that can be carried out by patient himself . small pocket size glucometers are available commercially . they give instant blood glucose results . a person can check blood glucose at different times in a day and as and when required in the case of hypoglycemia . your visits to pathology laboratory are reduced . you know your blood glucose levels over a long period that helps in maintaining normoglycemia . blood test done in laboratory by venous route have slightly different values than those checked by glucometer . having glucometer for insulin requiring patient is the top priority in the purchase list of your household gadgets . long term complications of diabetes and management : diabetic complications are medical problems that occur more often in people with diabetes than those without diabetes . uncontrolled diabetes over a long period of time causes changes in practically every organ in the body . if proper precaution is taken at the right time , most of these complications are avoidable or can at least be postponed . high blood sugar levels for long period cause changes in the blood vessels and nerves . this leads to involvement of target organs . the lining of blood vessels gets thicker and the lumen is reduced . as a result blood flow to the affected organ is reduced . thus the heart , brain , kidney etc . can get affected if the related vessels are involved . regular follow-up with the doctor , meticulous sugar control and following the advice does help in the management of these complications . the major organs affected by diabetes are eyes , heart , kidney , foot . eyes : early cataractus changes and changes in blood vessels of eyes are very common . it is a usual cause of blindness in diabetes and it is avoidable to some extent . visit the specialist once a year for eye examination even if you do not have any eye problem ( it your diabetes is more than five years old ) . remember that correction for spectacle number by an optician is not enough . heart and brain : if the disease is not controlled heart and brain blood vessels of diabetics are affected at earlier stage than non-diabetic people . diabetics may not experience typical “ filmy type chest ” pain of heart attack . most of the times they may only feel some discomfort . silent infarct or painless heart attacks do occur in diabetic patients due to involvement of nerves and blood vessels . unexplained sweating , discomfort in left arm and neck can be an indication of heart attack . some important tips are strictly follow the advice of the doctor . do not postpone the specialized tests like the treadmill test , recommended by the doctor just because you may not suffer at that moment . most of the heart attacks and paralysis can be averted or atleast postponed if medication is started in time . be particular about your diet , fat intake and exercises . these have definitive roles in prevention of heart diseases . kidney : kidney failures and problems are very commonly seen in uncontrolled diabetes . high blood pressure is a common occurrence in diabetic patients . regular examination of blood pressure and urine should be done to avoid this complication . examination of urinary proteins and microalbumin is essential to initiate early treatment and retard kidney damage . do not wait for warning symptoms of high blood pressure to occur . foot : foot in diabetes is at risk . there are three major problems . poor blood circulation . reduced sensation due to involvement of nerves . susceptibility to infections . the pain , which is a protective reflex , may be absent in some patients due to involvement of nerves . in such cases the injury may go unnoticed . this can lead to foot ulcer and infections . due to poor blood circulation the healing process is very slow . each year more than 50,000 people with diabetes lose a limb or a part of a limb due to diabetic complication . this can be upsetting news to the patient but most of these problems are because of unawareness and negligence of both the patient and the doctor . some foot care tips . wear proper sized footware . inspect your feet daily for blister , injury . discoloration on foot . wash and scrub the foot gently . moisten with cream after proper drying . in-toe space for infection . pressure points due to footwear . cracks over heels . never walk barefooted indoor or outdoor . wear cotton socks . cut nails straight across . remember : footwear shopping should be done preferably late in the afternoon when foot is slightly bigger in size than in the morning hours . inspect your shoes from inside before wearing and remove any foreign materials like small stones or sand . do not buy footwear unless they are 100 % comfortable . report to the doctor about foot injury if it does not heal in 2-3 days . nerves : long years of uncontrolled diabetes in some patients can lead to involvement of nerves . burning in feet and cramps in legs are very common . they can have tingling sensation over feet , sole and fingers . this is described as glove and stocking type of neuropathy . this is very important as sensations at these points may be decreased and injury may go unnoticed . these painless injuries may lead to diabetic foot complications . sexual dysfunction long standing uncontrolled dm is one of the reasons for impotence . complete physical and psychological evaluation is necessary . advanced medical care offers good results in the management of sexual dysfunction . psychological factors and diabetes : diagnosis of diabetes in the very first stage can cause lot of stress to the patient . some patients feel victimized . they may have “ why me “ feeling . there is no cure to this disease . person has to live with it . but most of these above-mentioned negative reactions are due to misconceptions about diabetes . there is a lot of unawareness about it . counseling to the patient at this stage helps to alter his attitude towards the disease . this in turn results in better acceptance and compliance . involvement of family members in diabetes care is very important . person may feel deprived of food due to many restrictions on diet . tailor-made diet that will take into account person ’ s likes and dislikes can be offered with the help of a dietician . sexual dysfunction can be a major factor of worry . help of andrologists , gynaecologists and psychologists can reorient life in a proper direction . other psychological stress factors like office work , household problems , financial difficulties can ultimately lead to a rise in the blood glucose level . the health care personnel should extend his support to cope up such situations . regular aerobics , yogic exercises and meditation plays an important role in stress management . short vacation from routine life can be of great help as a stress reliever . can diabetes be prevented ? it is a million-dollar question . it is theoretically possible but practically very difficult . this is because it does not have one specific reason which one can take care of preventive steps can be taken at different stages . primary prevention : this means the prevention of diabetes mellitus to occur at first step . genetic counseling can help at this step . marriage between two diabetic persons is not advisable as stronger family history makes offspring more prone to get diabetes . ideally , marriage between two genetic prediabetic should be avoided . gene therapy and specific protection against the disease are the challenges of new millenium . person having strong family history of diabetes can definitely take some precautions . healthy food habits and a physically active life can keep the disease away . risk factors like obesity , smoking and tobacco chewing are definitely modifiable . what you need is more of self-control and self-confidence . you should always be telling yourself “ it is not difficult , i can do it ” . secondary prevention : earliest diagnosis of the disease and proper management is required to avoid the long-term complications . this can be achieved by maintaining blood glucose levels as normal as possible . various tests for screening of target organs are easily available . complete medical check up and tests like microalbumin excretion , treadmill test , and fundoscopy are helpful in detecting the earliest involvement of organs . medical intervention at right time and initiation of medication definitely can postpone or retard the development of complications . tertiary prevention : at tertiary level of prevention , measures can be taken to retard the progress of complications , which have already occurred . target organ involvement like heart disease , kidney problem is managed successfully . newer techniques in cardiology , advances in the field of dialysis and renal replacement therapy have brightened the life of diabetics . modern medical practice has really offered not only longevity but also better quality of life to diabetic people . epilogue : now you should be convinced that diabetes is not the dreaded disease as it was thought to be decades before . your positive attitude towards the disease is very important . what we require is little modification in your life style to make it more organized and disciplined ! availability of artificial sweeteners allows you to enjoy delicious food preparations . newer injection devices and purer forms of insulin have made life of diabetics more comfortable . advancement in pancreatic transplants , gene therapy definitely offers brighter future to the diabetic population . better understanding about the disease and its management will help you to lead healthy , complication free life . how does someone get diabetes ? you develop diabetes when your body can ’ t use glucose ( sugar ) properly . instead of burning up the sugar through your everyday activities , the average amount of sugar in your blood rises . what are the complications of diabetes ? if this abnormally high sugar level is not treated it can harm different parts of the body . the complications diabetes can cause include damage to : the eyes ; kidneys ; heart ; blood vessels ; and nerves . if diabetes is detected early , it can be treated and the risk of developing serious problem scan be greatly reduced . how many people in ireland have diabetes ? it is estimated that 200,000 people in the republic of ireland have diabetes . this number is expected to increase because our population is growing and ageing , and obesity rates are rising . if you are older and overweight , you are at increased risk of developing type diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a condition that makes it difficult for the body to use the glucose ( sugar ) in the blood . the body normally produces a hormone called insulin . insulin is produced by the pancreas . the pancreas is an organ found in the tummy area quite close to the stomach . insulin allows the glucose in our food to be taken from the blood and used by the body for energy . people with diabetes either don ’ t have enough insulin or the insulin that their pancreas produces does not work effectively . this means the body can not move the glucose out of the blood , so the sugar levels in the blood remain high . this extra glucose in the blood causes significant problems for the body 's functions . what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? you may be diagnosed after you go to your gp ( family doctor ) because : you feel tired or ill ; you have been losing weight ; you have an infection that is slow to clear up ; you are always thirsty the increased glucose in your blood brings more water through the kidneys to be passed as urine causing thirst and dehydration ; your vision is blurred extra glucose can be absorbed into the eye and cause blurred vision . what are the different types of diabetes ? there are a few different types of diabetes . the most common type 2 diabetes mellitus and type 1 diabetes mellitus . approximately 9 out of 10 people with diabetes will have type 2. women can sometimes get diabetes when they are pregnant . this is called gestational diabetes because it usually only lasts during the pregnancy . what is type 1 diabetes mellitus ? when someone has type 1 diabetes : their pancreas has stopped producing insulin . the exact cause of this condition is still unknown . it usually occurs in people under 35years of age , but there are exceptions to this . what is type 2 diabetes mellitus ? when someone has type 2 diabetes , the pancreas still produces some insulin , but : the pancreas is not producing enough insulin to meet the body ’ s needs ; or the insulin that is produced is not working very well . older people are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes , but there are exceptions to this . how is type 1 diabetes treated ? people with this type of diabetes need to inject insulin use an insulin pump . how is type 2 diabetes treated ? there are various ways to treat type 2 diabetes . the choice depends on many factors and 6differs between individuals . treatment may include any of the following combinations : diet and exercise ; diet , exercise and tablets ; diet , exercise , tablets and insulin ; diet , exercise and insulin . how is gestational diabetes treated ? in gestational diabetes , the extra demands of pregnancy mean that the mother does not have enough insulin to meet her body ’ s needs . this type of diabetes is first treated by controlling the quantity and type of the mothers food and drink . if this is not enough to treat the condition , the mother may begiven extra insulin as an injection . it is vital for the baby ’ s health that the mother does not have high blood sugar levels because the extra sugar supplies can cause the baby to grow too big . is a hypo the same as low blood sugar ? hypoglycaemia or a hypo is when the glucose level in the blood ( blood sugar level ) drops below the normal range . below normal is when it is less than 4mmol/l ( mg/dl ) . some tablets and insulin can cause a hypo especially if : meals are delayed ; or they are taken after unusually strenuous physical activity . what are the hypo warning signs ? if you have a hypo you may feel symptoms such as : sweating ; shaking ; dizziness ; and blurred vision . what should i do if i think i ’ m getting a hypo ? if you feel your blood sugar going low , you should treat it as soon as possible . never delay treatment of a low sugar level . hypo can be corrected by taking something sweet to drink or eat , such as ( for an adult ) : 100mls of lucozade ; or three glucose sweets . if you will not be eating a proper meal within the next hour , you should eat some carbohydrate ( starchy ) food like cereal bar or sandwich or follow the instructions that your diabetes team gives you . this will make sure that your blood sugar does not go low again . always tell your doctor or diabetes nurse about any hypos , unless you know why it happened , so that they can decide if your medication needs to be altered . how can i prevent hypos ? try not to miss a meal . try to eat carbohydrate at every meal ( for example , pasta , bread or rice ) . if you exercise , eat a snack and test your glucose levels every few hours a hypo can occur even a significant time after exercising . always carry some form of sugar with you such as glucose sweets or drinks , such as lucozade , in case you experience a hypo . it is very important to carry identification that shows you have diabetes , such as an identification bracelet , which you can buy on what are high blood sugar levels ? hyperglycaemia or high blood sugar levels are when the blood glucose level is above the target set for you . in the short term , high blood sugars will leave you feeling unwell and tired . if you have high blood sugars for a long time , it can lead to : eye disease ; heart problems ; and foot ulcers . diabetes is also associated with high blood pressure . if your blood glucose levels are constantly high , you should contact your doctor . what causes high blood sugar levels ? people with diabetes may have high blood glucose levels because : they have not taken their insulin ; they have an infection or illness ; or they have eaten too much food . even if you can not eat , illness can cause your blood sugar level to rise . will i need more insulin if i am ill ? if you are ill , you should check your blood glucose levels more frequently and never forget to take your insulin . you may need to increase your insulin during illness . if your blood glucose level is higher that 15 mmols ( 270 mg/dl ) , for more than one hour , check your blood or urine for ketones . if ketones are present you should follow your diabetes team instructions or contact them . measuring blood sugar levels why do i need to measure the sugar level in my blood ? the best way to monitor your diabetes is by measuring your blood sugar levels . you do this with a finger-prick blood test . if you find it difficult to do finger-prick blood tests , urine tests are another way of testing sugar levels . however , urine tests are not as accurate , but they are appropriate and adequate for some people . what is my ideal blood sugar level ? target blood sugar levels vary from person to person and you should ask your diabetes team to set a personal target for you . but generally the ideal target blood sugar levels should be : less than 10 mmol/l ( 180 mg/dl ) ; or less than 8 mmol/s ( 145 mg/dl ) in younger people . ask your doctor or nurse what your targets are . what are my target blood sugar levels ? fasting before meals after eating when should i do my blood tests ? you should test your blood sugar level : when you wake in the morning ; and before meals . your tests will tell you how well diet , medication and exercise are working together to control your diabetes . they also provide useful information for your doctor . how often should i do my blood tests ? generally you should measure your glucose levels between one and four times a day . your doctor or nurse will have the best advice on how often you need to test . during illness or if you change your lifestyle , you will need to test more often . what type of diet should i eat ? the ideal diet for people with diabetes is very much like the ideal diet for everybody else . a healthy diet is an essential part of treatment for people with diabetes and therefore needs to be followed for life . healthy diets are : low in refined sugar ; low in saturated fat ; high in fibre , vitamins and minerals . if you are overweight it is essential that you lose weight by changing your diet and exercising . this helps to improve your diabetes control because the insulin you produce works better and there are less demands on your body . anyone diagnosed with diabetes should be given an appointment with a dietician to help them with their diet . are there any tips for healthy eating ? eat regular meals eat regular meals every day , especially breakfast . check with your diabetes team if your insulin regime means you need to take a snack before going to bed at night . eat starchy foods as the main part of each meal , eat a starchy food like one of the following : bread ; cereal ; potato ; pasta ; or rice . try to eat the same amount of starchy foods at your meals each day . choose high fiber foods like : weetabix ; porridge ; bran flakes ; whole meal breads ; wholegrain rice ; or pastas . don ’ t take in too much sugar limit the intake of sugar and sugary foods . when you do take them as a treat , eat them with your meal . use an artificial sweetener instead of sugar in hot drinks . it is best to avoid or take in moderation the following foods : sugar ; chocolate and sweets ; honey and glucose ; regular jams and marmalades ; cakes and sweet biscuits ; and regular squash and sugary fizzy drinks . keep your fat intake low choose lean cuts of meat , remove visible fat and use low-fat methods of cooking like : oven baking , stewing , roasting , grilling , boiling , poaching , steaming or microwaving . choose low-fat dairy products . use low-fat spread instead of butter or margarine . limit the amount of spread used . use low-fat milk instead of regular milk . eat oily fish eat oily fish at least twice a week . include fish like : mackerel ; salmon ; sardines ; trout ; fresh or frozen tuna ; and herrings . eat vegetables and fruit eat plenty of vegetables and fruit . aim to have at least five portions each day spread out over the day . reduce your salt you should not add salt to your food at the table and you should reduce your intake of salty foods like : processed meats ; packet sauces ; gravies ; smoked fish ; crisps ; and nuts . diabetic foods are not useful you are not advised or recommended to buy special diabetic foods like sweets , chocolate and biscuits . this is because these foods are high in fat and therefore high in calories . should i worry about my cholesterol level ? it is important to control your cholesterol level . high cholesterol level may speed up the hardening of the arteries and increase your risk of heart attack . healthy low-fat diet with plenty of high-fibre starch helps to control your cholesterol level . according to european guidelines : people with diabetes should aim for cholesterol level of below4.5 mmol/l . however , this varies from person to person . ask your doctor to set a personal cholesterol target for you . your doctor may prescribe some medication to help control your cholesterol level . what about sport and exercise ? exercise is important to help you manage your diabetes . exercise helps you to : lose weight ; lower your blood pressure ; reduce your blood sugar levels ; and allow your insulin and tablets to work more effectively . it is always useful to increase your level of movement . always check with your doctor or nurse before starting a new exercise routine . you can ask your diabetes team to help you to develop an exercise plan . should i reduce my alcohol intake ? alcoholic drinks contain a lot of calories almost as many as fats and very few or no nutrients . you must be careful about how much you drink . you do n't have to give it up , but remember that alcohol : lowers your blood sugar ; and hides the signs of hypoglycemia ( low blood sugar ) . it is recommended that : women have fewer than two standard drinks of alcohol a day ; and men have fewer than three standard drinks of alcohol a day . it is recommended to have two or three alcohol-free days each week . standard drink is a regular pub measure . how often should i have my eyes tested ? when you have diabetes you should have your eyes checked every year by the doctor -including a full examination of the back of the eye . this is different to a vision test for glasses . what types of medication will need ? people with type diabetes will need to take regular injections of insulin or use an insulin pump . people with type 2 diabetes can be treated by exercise and diet . however , some people may need tablets and , or , insulin . there are many different types of tablets available for the treatment of type 2 diabetes . many of these tablets work differently from each other and often more than one type of tablet is used . 14 your doctor will prescribe a treatment which is best suited to you . your medications help to control your blood sugar levels in combination with a healthy diet and regular activity . will i have to pay for my medication s ? long term illness scheme ( lti ) diabetes is covered under the lti scheme for people resident in the republic of ireland . this means that all medication for diabetes and related conditions available to you free of charge under this scheme . this includes medication for high blood pressure and high cholesterol and glucose-testing strips . how to apply for the lti if you want to register for the lti scheme : ask your doctor to complete lti application form ; and submit this form to the local health service executive office . your doctor should be able to tell you where the local office is located . when you are registered under the lti scheme , you will receive an lti book in the post.it shows your registration number . registered patients may get their medication from any pharmacy . how does diabetes affect driving ? if you take tablets or insulin for diabetes , you must inform the driving license authority that you have diabetes . you can find the number for your local driving license authority in the telephone book . do i need to tell my car insurance company that i have diabetes ? you must inform your car insurance company that you have diabetes . if you don ’ t it may mean you are at risk of driving without insurance . your car insurance will not cost more when you have diabetes . for this report we take a different approach : we start by considering the implementation of genetic testing and screening in developing countries ; then identify some of the significant social features that affect the implementation of such services ; we explore the ethical , legal and social issues associated with these features and highlight some of the methods employed by different countries to address them . the report therefore does not aim to cover all the ethical aspects of genetic testing and screening , but rather to discuss in more detail some of the major ethical , legal , social and human rights issues that are specific to developing countries . many of these issues have been touched on in other international publications ; this report brings these themes together , at a time when there is an increasing body of empirical evidence regarding the experience of medical genetic services in developing countries and the ethical issues raised . the goal of this report is to expand and enrich the discussion of some of the major specific to medical genetic services in developing countries , and to suggest principles for effective management of the ethical , legal and social issues raised by genetic testing and screening in these contexts . the report does not specifically discuss the elsi related to the integration of genomics into public health more generally , the role of genetics in common chronic diseases or genomic research . these issues are important and the associated elsi deserve international attention . however , as this report focuses on the situation in developing countries , many of which are still in the process of establishing traditional medical genetic services , an analysis of these new issues would distract from the core elsi themes surrounding genetic testing and screening . nor does the report aim to provide a systematic analysis of the treatment , management and care options available for people with genetic conditions . the report focuses on the elsi of genetic testing and screening . issues relating to treatment and care of genetic conditions are raised only where they are relevant to discussion of the elsi . it is important at the outset to contextualize the health burden resulting from genetic and congenital disorders , within the wider picture of the often overwhelming health burdens facing developing , particularly low-income , countries . itis estimated that each year 11 million children die , the majority in developing countries , before their fifth birthday , mostly as a result of malnutrition or from diseases that are considered to be easily preventable in developed countries . in 2001 , life expectancies in developed countries were in the range of 75 to 80 years , while in developing countries they remained between 40 and 50 years . many developing countries now suffer from the burden of infectious diseases , such as hiv/aids , malaria and tuberculosis , in addition to the burden of chronic diseases , such as cardiovascular diseases , cancer , respiratory diseases and diabetes . 2hile this report discusses the burden of genetic and congenital disorders and makes recommendations about the services and systems required to support genetic testing and screening programmes , it is the responsibility of national governments to assess and prioritize the health needs of their populations . the priority assigned to genetic services , with respect to other health services , is a matter of public health policy in each country , and should be expected to differ accordingly . differences in countries epidemiology , demographic factors and health systems mean that no standard set of interventions can be applied globally . this report therefore discusses the principles of effective management of the elsi of genetic testing and screening . these principles will have to be translated into specific policies , appropriate to the local context , by individual governments . nevertheless , genetics is an important , and often under-recognized , contributing factor to disease and ill health worldwide ( 265 ) . inherited conditions affect millions of families throughout the world . it is estimated that about 5 % of all pregnancies result in the birth of a child with a significant congenital disorder , many of which are due in part to genetic factors . in developing countries hereditary conditions account for about15 % to 25 % of perinatal and infant mortality . at least 7.6 million children are born annually with a severe congenital and/or genetic disorder . in the absence of appropriate facilities and care , most of these children die undiagnosed , early in life . the overriding ethical issue is the lack of accessible , affordable , safe , medical care and services for these children and their families . while some of the issues and challenges raised by genetic testing and screening arise globally , there are other concerns that are specific or more prevalent in developing countries . for example , discrimination and stigmatization can present informal barriers to health care access worldwide . many international and national reports on genetic testing and screening have focused extensively on the potential for discrimination in relation to health insurance and employment . while this is also a concern in developing countries , an additional concern regarding stigmatization relates to the discrimination of female mutation carriers in communities with a high prevalence of autosomal recessive genetic diseases and a cultural preference for arranged marriage . other issues are equally relevant to developed and developing countries but have a greater impact in developing countries . for example , the concerns around commercial genetic testing are more acute in environments with lower levels of public testing facilities and limited ( or no ) regulatory structures in place to protect patient safety and provide quality assurance . such environments are more prevalent in developing , low-income , countries . the report will focus on seven major ethical , social and legal issues that apply to the introduction of medical genetic services . these are : distributive justice ; the social context in developing countries as it specifically relates to testing and screening , including consanguineous marriage , religion , gender , and views and policies on abortion for medical purposes ; stigmatization and discrimination ; protection of privacy and confidentiality ; facilitating patient decision-making ; genetics education ; and quality assurance and patient safety . for this report , we distinguish between developed and developing countries . although this terminology is not ideal , it is still used extensively in the literature and there is at present no widely accepted alternative . for the purposes of clarity we use the world bank classification of developed and developing countries which is attached in appendix a. according to the world bank classification , developed countries include all high-income economies except china hong kong special administrative region ( hong kong sar ) , israel , kuwait , singapore , and the united arab emirates . these five countries are classified as developing despite their high per capita income because of their economic structure or the official opinion of their governments . developing countries therefore include all low-income and middle-income economies , as well as the five high-income economies mentioned above . primer of medical genetics and genetic services : this section will introduce the concepts of genes , genetics and inheritance . it includes a review of current genetic diagnostic technologies , the types of genetic tests , their goals and their possible uses in public health in the context of medical genetic services . in addition , the main strategies for the prevention and care of genetic diseases and their relevance for developing countries are presented . genes and chromosomes : the human genome is constituted by very long chains of deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) , packaged in structures called chromosomes , which are located in the nucleus of the cells . humans possess two sets of 23 chromosomes , one set derived from each parent , carrying the same genes . a gene is a segment of dna that instructs the cell to produce a specific polypeptide . the sex chromosomes are xy because this is a male karyotype ; a female karyotype would have xx . deoxyribonucleic acid : dna is the main chemical structure of the gene , and consists of two long strings of nucleotide bases . there are four bases : adenine ( a ) , guanine ( g ) , cytosine ( c ) and thymine ( t ) . dna ’ s ‘ instruction code ’ is determined by the sequence of the four constitutive bases , in such a way that units of three bases form informational units , each with a ‘ meaning ’ that instructs the cell machinery to incorporate a specific amino acid during the assembly of a polypeptide or protein . proteins , in turn , are chains of amino acids that fulfil essential biological functions , as structural proteins and as enzymes . mendelian inheritance : if a man and a woman have identical alleles ( gene copies ) at the same gene locus , called for example , they can only produce germ cells ( sperm or eggs ) of type ‘ a ’ , and consequently can only have children with an ‘ aa ’ geno-type . if , on the other hand , ‘ a ’ exists in another form ( or allele ) , and the genotype of the father is ‘ aa ’ and the mother is ‘ aa ’ , then although the father can only produce ‘ a ’ germ cells , half the mothers will be ‘ a ’ , and half will be ’ a ’ . it follows that half the children will have the genotype ‘ aa ’ and half ‘ aa ’ . on the other hand , if both parents have the genotype ‘ aa ’ , then one quarter of the children will have the genotype ‘ aa ’ . if the a allele causes a disease , its appearance in families will depend on whether it is dominantly inherited ( expressed in heterozygotes , aa ) or recessively inherited ( expressed in homozygotes , aa ) . if dominantly inherited , on average half the children of an affected parent will be affected . if recessively inherited , on average quarter of the children of aa parents ( heterozygotes or carriers ) will be affected ( aa ) . two features of the human genome are of note . in the first place , the approximately 25 , 000 genes of the human genome constitute only about 2 % of the length of the genome : the remaining 98 % of the dna does not code for any protein and its function is still largely unknown . secondly , there is a very small fraction of coding dna that is not in the chromosomes , but instead in special organelles in the cytoplasm of the cells , called mitochondria . mitochondrial genes are essential in the production of proteins involved in energy metabolism and are transmitted to the offspring only by the mother . each individual inherits a single copy of the whole genome from the father and the mother , thus harboring two copies of each gene , except for the genes located in the sex chromosomes . in addition , each individual inherits the mitochondrial genes from the mother . the genome has the inherent characteristic of undergoing mutations , changes in its dna sequence . mutations may involve substitutions , deletions or duplications of bases , and have been occurring in the dna of all species for millions of years . in humans , gene mutations occur spontaneously or may be triggered by environmental factors such as radiation , infections or exposure to certain chemicals . when new gene mutations occur in the dna of germ cells , they can be transmitted to offspring , accounting for the accumulation of such mutations in the population after tens or hundreds of generations . thus , the genes of all human beings carry some variations ( mutations ) in their dna structure . dna mutations can ( a ) be neutral with respect to disease ; ( b ) result in a small change in function affecting disease susceptibility ; or ( c ) result in significant alteration of function . some mutations in genes determine a change in the dna instruction code ; a subset of gene mutations can result in the production of an abnormal or deficient protein , or even the absence of a produced protein . depending on the function and importance of the protein in question , disease may result . this chain of events is mediated by numerous other intervening factors ( other gene products , environmental factors , etc . ) such that it is rare for a gene mutation by itself to determine all the clinical manifestations ( or lack thereof ) associated with a particular condition . genes in families and populations : genes are transmitted from parents to offspring through the reproductive cells ( gametes ) : the male ’ s sperm and the females eggs . each gamete contains a single copy of each gene ( haploid number ) . the diploid genome ( two copies of each gene ) is reconstituted in the fertilized egg . the observable expression of a gene ( trait , characteristic or clinical manifestations of disease ) is called the phenotype . there are some autosomal diseases that are manifested when only one copy ( allele ) of the gene enharbours a deleterious mutation . these diseases are called dominant , because the ill effect of the affected allele overpowers the expression of the normal allele . in other autosomal diseases , the clinical manifestations occur only when both copies of a gene have a deleterious mutation : these are called recessive diseases . in the case of x-linked recessive diseases , where the deleterious allele is located on the x chromosome , males can express the phenotype when they have only one copy of the allele . women who are carriers have the disease allele on one x chromosome , and a normal allele on the other , and so do not usually express the . individuals who carry a single dose of an autosomal recessive mutation are healthy because the function of the normal gene is sufficient to avoid disease . these individuals are called carriers . it is important to recognize that for every patient with a recessive disease in a population , there exist many healthy carriers of a single dose of the affected allele ; in other words , recessive genes exist in populations mainly in single doses , causing no disease in the carrier . the maintenance of a recessive gene mutation in a population occurs essentially through transmission from a carrier parent to the offspring.it is only when two prospective parents are both carriers of the same mutation that there is probability of having affected children ( those who inherit the mutation from both parents ) . the knowledge of this phenomenon is the basis for carrier screening programmes for recessive conditions particularly prevalent in some populations , which provide couples and individuals with information for reproductive purposes . the evolving concept of genetic disease : the concept of genetic disease has been evolving along with advances in medicine , medical genetics and our ability to analyze the human genome . the molecular study of genes and their relationship to health and disease started with linus pauling characterization of the molecular defect in the gene for one of the hemoglobin chains , which causes sickle cell disease . in the subsequent 50 years , hundreds of disease-causing gene mutations were identified , a process that was accelerated by the human genome project , which sequenced the whole human genome . of the approximately25 000 genes presumed to constitute the human genome , 15 000 have been identified thus far . a great amount of human genetic variation has been uncovered and the very concept of genetic disease is in revision . in fact , we now know that virtually all diseases have a genetic component , at the same time as we know that all diseases have environmental components . environmental factors , in fact , account for most of the burden of disease and the variations in prevalence of diseases among populations , including diseases with a genetic component . in this report , we use a very broad definition of genetic disease : that of any condition in which there is an identifiable genetic component in causation . while this definition helps to include conditions such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases , the fact remains that the latter are due primarily to environmental factors.in fact , the uncovering of genetic influences in virtually all diseases will perhaps render the term genetic disease obsolete , and we will soon be talking rather of diseases with major or minor genetic components , according to the relative weight of genetic factors in causation . notwithstanding these considerations , this report will adhere to the current classification of the three major categories of diseases with genetic components : chromosomal abnormalities , monogenic diseases and multifactorial diseases . chromosomal abnormalities the first category of genetic conditions , well known since the 1970s , is caused by chromosomal abnormalities , which are usually genetic accidents occurring at the time of conception ( such as the non-disjunction of homologous chromosomes in the formation of the gametes ) , as a result of which the fertilized egg is conceived with an excess or deficiency of chromosomal material . the most common example is trisomy 21 ( down syndrome ) , where chromosome 21 is present in triplicate due to an accidental error in the formation of one of the gametes . chromosomal disorders also include those occurring as a result of structural rearrangement of chromosomal material and micro-deletions of portions of the chromosome . chromosome imbalances contribute to about 1020 % of the public health burden of spontaneous abortion , congenital anomalies , mental retardation and developmental disorders worldwide . monogenic diseases : second category of diseases with a genetic component is that due to major mutations or highly penetrant mutations . diseases resulting from a major mutation in a single gene are called monogenic diseases , single-gene diseases , or mendelian diseases , because they are inherited in families following the laws of inheritance described by mendel : autosomal recessive , autosomal dominant , and x-linked inheritance . there are about 1500 monogenic diseases where the genetic defect has been identified . they tend to cause severe illness and a wide range of clinical manifestations depending on the function of the gene involved . typical examples are the haemoglobinopathies ( thalassaemia , sickle cell disease ) , cystic fibrosis , phenylketonuria , the haemophilias , muscular dystrophies , huntington disease and neurofibromatosis . while individually are , they affect collectively about 1 % of thepopulation worldwide . multifactorial diseases a third category of diseases with a genetic component is the result of complex long-lasting interactions between environmental factors ( nutrition , infections , exposure to toxins , living conditions and lifestyle , psychosocial stress , etc . ) and gene variations of minor effect . these diseases are called multifactorial because many different factors contribute to their causation . multifactorial diseases constitute the major bulk of the global burden of disease . they include congenital anomalies , coronary artery disease , cancers , mental illness , diabetes , obesity , hypertension and many others . while single-gene conditions refer to one end of a spectrum where the effect of a mutation in a single gene is sufficient to cause disease , in multifactorial diseases an overriding effect of any single gene is not evident and non-genetic factors are increasingly relevant . here , mutations in any particular gene are neither necessary nor sufficient to independently cause a disease . rather , the concerted interactions between several genetic variants and environmental factors combine to create a state of health or disease . the genetic component of these diseases is variable and does not usually account for more than 1020 % of the attributable risks . this genetic component does not necessarily determine disease and can be better understood as the impact of many genes of minor effect that increase or reduce the probability that an individual will develop condition , in interaction with adverse environmental factors . variations in genetic susceptibility can also explain increased or reduced resistance to infectious agents . distribution of genetic diseases in the population and impact on morbidity and mortality : the factors that influence the prevalence of genetic diseases in populations and their impact on the public ’ s health are best understood by specific category of disease . chromosomal abnormalities : chromosomal abnormalities occur mostly as a result of biological errors in the transmission of chromosomes from parents to offspring . the average birth prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities in liveborn is 1 in 200 , and the most common example is down syndrome . the following fundamental features of chromosomal abnormalities are of note : the occurrence of non-disjunction , and hence the prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities , is highly correlated with ma-ternal age . thus , the incidence of these conditions varies according to the maternal age structure of the population . for example the prevalence at birth of down syndrome is 1 in 1000 among mothers younger than 30 years and about 1 in 100 in mothers over 35 years old . the occurrence of chromosomal abnormalities at each maternal age is similar in all populations . the main clinical manifestations of chromosomal abnormalities are congenital anomalies , mental retardation and infertility . further , they are the main cause of miscarriages , as the overwhelming majority of chromosomally abnormal embryos are aborted spontaneously ( an estimated 60 % of spontaneous abortions involve a fetus affected by a chromosome abnormality ) . it is estimated that chromosomal abnormalities are responsible for about 1020 % of congenital anomalies and mental retardation in children . the development of prenatal screening and prenatal diagnosis is reducing the prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities in countries where these services are avail-able and accessible , as they are in developed countries . socio-cultural circumstances and limited access to family planning in developing countries contribute to a higher proportion of births at advanced maternal age , explaining a higher prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities . this is further compounded by the lack of prenatal screening programmes and accessible pre-natal diagnosis services . single-gene diseases : most of the several hundred known single-gene diseases are individually rare ( prevalences at birth of 1 in 2 , 000 to 1 in 100 , 000 ) . however , they collectively affect about 1 % of the population worldwide and tend to have serious clinical manifestations , high morbidity and early mortality , and primarily affect the pediatric population . since these conditions are due chiefly to inherited gene mutations , their prevalence in a population depends on the frequency of deleterious mutations . in turn , the gene frequency of a particular mutation in a population depends on several factors : when the mutation appeared for the first time and in which population ; the frequency of the new mutation ; whether the mutation is expressed in a dominant or recessive manner . its clinical manifestations and how these affect survival and reproduction of those who carry it ; the process of natural selection ; demographic phenomena such as reproductive patterns . migrations and founder effects ; and genetic drift due to chance variation . varying combinations of the above phenomena explain the variations in the prevalence of a particular single-gene disease in different populations . well-known examples are : sickle cell disease , more prevalent in africa and in people of african descent ( and the asian sickle cell disease haplotype more prevalent in populations in the middle east , the mediterranean basin the indian subcontinent ) ; thalassaemias , more prevalent in people of african , mediterranean and south-east asian descent ; cystic fibrosis , more prevalent in populations of northern european descent ; and tay sachs disease , more prevalent among people of ashkenazi jewish descent . in addition , some single-gene diseases have reached very high frequencies ( clusters ) in specific populations due to a combination of founder effect , genetic drift and genetic isolation . examples are huntington disease in venezuela . spinocerebellar atrophy type 2 in cuba , and oculocutaneous albinism in south africa . single-gene disorders cause a significant burden to public health either when they are widely prevalent , like the haemoglobinopathies , or when the phenomenon of founder effect and reproductive patterns determine a high prevalence in a particular population , as in the above noted examples . autosomal dominant late-onset diseases there are a number of autosomal dominant late- onset diseases that are particularly frequent in some populations because of demographic factors , suchas founder effects and social or geographic isolation . in some cases , in particular population clusters , these diseases have reached levels that have a significant adverse impact on that populations health . one such example is spinocerebellar atrophy type 2 in the province of holguin , cuba , where hundreds of affected individuals , and thousands of at-risk individuals , live . a public health programme of pre-symptomatic testing of at-risk individuals , followed by genetic counselling and the offer of prenatal diagnosis , has been put in place by the public health system . similar situation exists for huntington disease in the maracaibo lake region of venezuela , which is home to hundreds of affected individuals and thousands of people at risk . common multifactorial diseases : the common diseases resulting from environment gene interactions and mentioned are sometimes called diseases of affluence because they acquired notoriety when developed countries started an epidemiological transition based on the control of infectious disease in the middle of the twentieth century . common multifactorial conditions , often referred to as chronic diseases , are responsible for the majority of morbidity and mortality worldwide . they include coronary artery disease , many cancers , hypertension , diabetes , obesity , asthma and mental illness , among others . while it is true that these common chronic diseases , mostly of adulthood , are the most significant health problem in affluent societies , their importance is growing alarmingly in developing countries . conclusion : while the existence and prevalence of genetic diseases ( excluding common multifactorial conditions ) in developing countries is well documented , the recognition of their significance for public health is recent . socioeconomic and cultural changes and improvements in maternal child health , nutrition , and control of infectious diseases in developing countries are causing an epidemiological transition whereby the contribution of genetic and congenital disorders to the burden of morbidity and mortality is more exposed . it must be noted , however , that over the last decade there has been a deterioration of the health situation in many developing countries , resulting from globalization , increased levels of poverty , privatization of services and inequities in health care . previous improvements in health indicators are also being eroded by the hiv/aids pandemic , the resurgence or resilience of old infections such as tuberculosis and malaria , pervasive malnutrition , and the current obesity epidemic . thus , a more accurate label of these phenomena is epidemiological accumulation rather than transition , as new morbidities are superimposed on old ones . nevertheless , there can be no doubt that multifactorial conditions , including congenital anomalies and common diseases , contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality in developing countries . genetic tests and their use : in the past couple of decades , a number of interventions aimed at the early detection , prevention and care of health problems caused by genetic factors , have been developed and implemented in developed countries . these developments have been facilitated by new or improved diagnostic technologies such as fetal ultrasound , improved cytogenetic techniques and biochemical analysis , direct analysis of genes causing monogenic disorders ( dna testing ) and prenatal diagnosis . in fact , there seems to be considerable hype about genetics in developed countries , where the capacity of genetic approaches to prevent and treat common diseases is perhaps exaggerated . in contrast , developing countries have been lagging in their implementation of public policies for the care and prevention of genetic diseases . it should be noted that both in developed and developing countries , even diseases with genetic components have overwhelmingly higher social , environmental and lifestyle attributable risks , and therefore their prevention will continue to require the control of those identified risks ( exposure to toxins like tobacco , sedentarism , poor diet , psychosocial stress and others ) . furthermore , the tendency to see genetic testing as the solution to the health problems posed by genetic diseases , out of the context of the health care system and genetic services , is not only ineffective but also fraught with a number of ethical risks . in this section , we will first review current genetic diagnostic technologies , the types of genetic tests , their goals and their possible uses in public health in the context of medical genetic services . in the next section we will analyze the main existing strategies for the prevention and care of genetic diseases and their relevance for developing countries . the development of genetic technologies has been most fruitful in devising tests to detect genetic abnormalities at the level of the chromosomes and the genes . the application of these diagnostic technologies is most advanced in developed countries , where the diagnosis of genetic diseases is shifting from analysis of the clinical manifestations to analysis of chromosome or molecular defects . further , genetic tests are being applied not only to individuals with symptoms or signs of disease ( classically referred to as patients ) but also to asymptomatic and healthy individuals ( whom the term patients does not fit well ) to determine genetic predispositions and predict the future onset of disease . the proliferation of new genetic diagnostic tools has been accompanied by confusion about terminology , and there are varying definitions of what constitutes a genetic test . indeed , the definition of genetic test suffers from the same ambiguities as the definition of what constitutes a genetic disease , as alluded to above . the confusion stems from the fact that genetic diseases can be diagnosed by many other approaches than dna testing : family history , physical examination , imaging techniques such as radiographs and ultrasound as well as biochemical and morphological laboratory tests that do not look at the genetic material itself . for the purpose of this report , a genetic test is defined as a laboratory test that analyses a particular configuration of the genetic material , be it ( a ) by direct analysis at the level of a gene or a chromosome , or ( b ) by testing a direct gene product ribonucleic acid ( rna ) , a structural protein or an enzyme or key metabolite . many of the other tests that reveal genetic information , but which fall outside this definition of genetic test , are also considered in the report because they form an important part of medical genetic services , particularly in developing countries . further , the ethical issues surrounding the use of genetic information are similar , irrespective of whether the information is generated through genetic tests or other investigations . many national and international guidelines and regulations , discussed throughout the report , include their own definitions of genetic test , some of which differ from this specific definition . goals of genetic tests : testing and screening : the main purposes of genetic tests are : diagnostic genetic testing : to diagnose a genetic disease ( chromosomal or mono-genic ) in a symptomatic patient ; presymptomatic genetic diagnosis : to make a prediction of future development of a monogenic disease in an asymptomatic individual ; predisposition genetic testing : to make a probabilistic estimation of the likelihood of future development of a multifactorial disease in a healthy individual ; genetic carrier testing : to determine whether a healthy individual is a carrier of a recessive mutation that may increase his/her risk of having affected offspring ; and prenatal genetic testing : to identify fetuses at increased risk of congenital abnormality . genetic tests can be applied to individuals in the context of health care , or to populations in the context of public health programmes . the term genetic testing usually refers to the use of genetic testing in individuals and families in the context of clinical care with the goals noted above . genetic testing is defined as testing offered to people already known to be at increased genetic risk in order to achieve a definitive diagnosis . for the purposes of the report , we use wald ’ s definition of screening : the systematic application of a test or enquiry to identify individuals at sufficient risk of specific disorder to benefit from further investigation or direct preventive action among people who have not sought medical attention because of the symptoms of that disorder . within this context , genetic screening refers to a basic test that is systematically offered to a defined population , in order to identify a group at increased genetic risk , who may then be offered further tests leading to a definitive diagnosis . characteristics of genetic tests : three main attributes are used to assess the health benefit of a genetic test : its analytical validity , its clinical validity , and its clinical utility . analytical validity refers to the performance of a genetic test in the laboratory , that is , the tests ability to detect the trait it seeks to measure ( dna , chromosomes , proteins or metabolites ) . the main items to consider in the analytical validity of a test are its sensitivity ( ability to detect an abnormality if it is present ) , its specificity ( results should be negative if there is no abnormality ) , and its reliability ( the probability of obtaining the same result consistently ) . the determination of the analytical validity of a genetic test is the responsibility of quality control state agencies . the clinical validity of a test refers to the accuracy with which it predicts the presence or absence of a clinical condition or predisposition . the components of clinical validity include : the probability that the test will be positive in patients with the disease in question ( clinical sensitivity ) ; the probability that the test will be negative inpatients without the disease ( clinical specificity ) ; the probability that patients with a positive result will develop the disease ( positive predictive value ) ; and the probability that patients with negative results will not manifest the disease ( negative predictive value ) . the clinical utility of a test refers to the actual usefulness of the test in improving the health and well-being of the persons tested , and it depends largely on whether the information provided by the test can be followed by effective and safe preventive or therapeutic interventions . given the increasing commercialization of genetic tests , it is not uncommon that they are marketed to the public without proper validation ( based on analytical validity , clinical validity and clinical utility ) in both developed and developing countries . the use of genetic tests that are not accurate , safe and effective is not only a waste of scarce health resources but also an unethical practice that puts the health and well-being of the public in jeopardy . it is an essential function and responsibility of the public health agencies in each country to ensure the characterization and validation of genetic tests by determining their analytical validity , clinical validity and clinical utility before they are utilized in health care . types of genetic tests and their possible application : in this section , the different types of genetic tests are discussed in conjunction with their applications . the availability and accessibility of all the different types of genetic tests are fraught with the usual inequities common to all health care services : access is better for individuals in urban centres , developed countries and the middle upperclasses , and worse in rural areas , developing countries and lower socioeconomic classes . chromosome tests : techniques for the genetic testing of chromosomal abnormalities have been in place for the past 40 years and are being applied worldwide . chromosome analysis is sometimes performed to confirm the diagnosis of a chromosome abnormality in patients suspected of having such conditions . newer techniques combine the classic analysis of the number and structure of chromosomes ( standard chromosome analysis ) , with high resolution and molecular cytogenetic analysis for the detection of sub-microscopic structural defects that may explain a patients condition . these techniques are also widely used in oncology to detect genetic abnormalities in tumour cells to define prognosis and guide treatment in a variety of cancers . the widest application of chromosome analysis is in the prenatal diagnosis of fetal chromosomal abnormalities in chorionic villi and amniotic fluid cells . several hundred thousand pregnancies are subjected to prenatal chromosome diagnosis annually , primarily in developed countries . dna tests in the diagnosis of symptomatic individuals there are currently over 1000 disease-associated genes that can be tested to aid the diagnosis of disease in patients suspected to have a monogenic disease or those at risk . this is indeed the major application of genetic testing in medicine thus far . the interpretation of results is not always straightforward , as there are often many nuances and subtleties . the clinical validity and clinical utility of each test vary according to the disease in question , the gene tested and the techniques employed . dna tests in prenatal diagnosis : the same principles and techniques used in dna testing for diagnostic purposes in symptomatic patients can be used for the genetic testing of a fetus at high risk for a specific single-gene disease . fetal cells are usually obtained from chorionic villi at 10 weeks of gestation or amniotic fluid at 14-16 weeks of gestation . both procedures are associated with a risk of procedure-induced abortion of 0.5 1 % , depending on the skills and experience of the operator . since the early 1990s , a procedure called pre- implantation genetic diagnosis ( pgd ) has been available to couples at risk of having a pregnancy affected by a genetic condition or chromosomal abnormality , as an alternative to prenatal diagnosis and termination of pregnancy . pgd involves a test performed on a single cell biopsied from the embryo at the 8-16 cell stage after in and before embryo implantation in the uterus . over 1000 procedures have now been performed in developed countries . pgd is a very expensive and high-tech procedure , whose long-term safety and efficacy is still under investigation . dna tests for predictive purposes : genetic testing is also used to predict the probability that an individual might develop a gene-associated disease in the future . in cases of monogenic diseases that have not yet presented symptoms , predictive testing is usually referred to as presymptomatic genetic testing . this type of genetic testing is mostly used to predict the development of autosomal dominant late-onset genetic diseases ( for example , huntington disease , spinocerebellar atrophy , familial adenomatous polyposis ) and is offered to high-risk individuals in families in which the disease is present . presymptomatic genetic testing is most notably offered to the offspring of an affected individual , who face a 50 % probability of having inherited the affected allele , in which case they would in all certainty develop the disease in the future . the ideal goal of presymptomatic genetic testing is to implement preventive or therapeutic measures to stem the development of the disease or reduce its severity . unfortunately , there are at present no such safe or effective health interventions for most known late-onset genetic diseases , making the clinical utility of their presymptomatic diagnosis rather low . for other monogenic conditions , like haemochromatosis and factor vleiden , genetic testing in the absence of symptoms or positive family history has low predictive value because of low penetrance and the presence of , as yet , poorly understood concurrent factors ( both genetic and environmental ) . genetic testing for multifactorial diseases aims to detect genetic variants associated with an increased probability of developing one of those conditions . this is called predisposition genetic testing , where a positive result would theoretically mean a higher than average susceptibility to develop the disease when environmental risk factors ( usually more important in causation ) are also at play . much research is targeted at detecting susceptibility alleles for common diseases in the hope that this knowledge may illuminate the mechanisms of disease , the causative role of genetic and environmental factors , and the development of newer methods of prevention and treatment . however , for the vast majority of multifactorial diseases , the genetic underpinnings of disease remain unknown and most predisposing mutations uncovered so far have very low penetrance and hence very low clinical validity . the only example of predisposition testing in a multifactorial condition demonstrating preliminary clinical validity is testing for mutations in the brca1 and brca2 genes in the assessment of breast and ovarian cancer risk in women with positive family history . the high clinical validity of this testing depends on the careful selection of patients ( those at high risk because of family history ) and on the fact that the mentioned genes are known to have high penetrance ( quasi-dominant ) . even when patient selection is adequate , the risk of future disease predicted by the test remains around 60 % . other examples of predisposition tests of potential clinical validity include tests for colon cancer , thyroid cancer , cardiomyopathies and alzheimer disease . the term genomic hype has been used to describe the belief that detecting individuals with higher than average genetic susceptibility to multifactorial diseases is the right approach to conquering diseases like coronary artery disease , diabetes , obesity and many cancers . for most of these diseases , environmental and lifestyle factors have attributable risks higher than 80 % , and the whole population is therefore at risk . furthermore , public health interventions aimed at the general population are thought to be safer and more effective ( for example , programmes to promote tobacco cessation and avoidance of exposure to possible carcinogens , physical exercise , diet , among others ) . dna tests for carrier status for reproductive purposes : genetic testing can be used to detect healthy carriers of recessive genes , with the aim of detecting couples in which both spouses carry the same recessive gene and , thus , are at risk of having affected offspring ; or women who are carriers of an x- linked recessive disorder . it is important to note , however , that in practice many tests used to identify carriers are not dna-based genetic tests . carrier genetic testing can be indicated in individuals with a positive family history of the disease in question . individuals tested can use their genetic information to make informed reproductive decisions . carrier genetic testing can also be aimed at the population at large , or at specific subpopulation groups , defined by age , gender or ethnicity . when carrier genetic testing is aimed at populations it is usually referred to as carrier genetic screening . screening for carriers of recessive mutations should be a function of the public health system and should meet a number of requirements before being undertaken : the condition in question should have high prevalence ; the condition in question should impose a significant health burden on the population ; the gene in question should be easily and inexpensively tested ; the analytical validity and clinical validity of the test should justify the screening ; genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis should be available ; and termination of affected pregnancies , for women who voluntarily choose to use this service , should be a feasible option . in addition , steps should be taken to educate communities and their leaders , and the population should have a clear interest in the programme.programmes should be strictly voluntary and there should be no pressure of any kind on anyone to be tested or to take any specific steps after results are delivered ( such as marrying , embarking on a pregnancy , having prenatal diagnosis , continuing or terminating an affected pregnancy ) . carrier screening programmes and the associated services should be implemented in a manner that is responsive to , and sensitive of , the populations religious and cultural views . examples demonstrating where and how this has been achieved are presented throughout the report . a number of successful carrier genetic screening programmes supported by education , counselling and access to prenatal diagnosis are in place in both developed and developing countries , particularly for the haemoglobinopathies and diseases common among ashkenazi jews . newborn screening : newborn screening is the dean of genetic screening programmes applied on very large and systematic scale for the past 40 years , both in developed countries and in some developing countries . it began in developed nations in the1960s with screening for phenylketonuria ( pku ) , which was followed soon after by screening for congenital hypothyroidism ( ch ) . the rationale for newborn screening accords with the paradigm of public health : early detection and ( preventive ) treatment before symptoms begin . again , many tests used in newborn screening are not dna-based tests . there are a number of prerequisites for the development and implementation of newborn screening . first , the condition to be screened for must be : severe ; frequent ; and amenable to easy , safe , reliable and in expensive laboratory diagnosis on a very large scale . second , a treatment that is cost-effective and makes a significant difference when it is started soon after birth rather than after symptoms are established should be available . third , there should be an effective treatment and follow-up programme for the affected infants identified , and every step of the programme should be the responsibility of the state and should ideally be offered free of charge . finally , the country should have a functional and well-structured public health system and good centralized laboratories to provide infrastructure for the screening programme . most importantly , newborn screening should have public support and be supported by adequate and sustainable public funding . over the last 20 years , new conditions have become candidates for newborn screening , and theiraddition to the testing panel has followed political , economic , medical and societal pressures . alldeveloped countries have instituted newborn screening programmes for pku , congenital hypothyroidism and a variable number of other conditions . developing countries have been slow to implement newborn screening and most have not yet started , as the above mentioned prerequisites are rarely fulfilled . in cuba and some large urban centres in argentina and brazil , newborn screening is available for pkuand ch . only cuba , however , can claim more than 50 % coverage of their newborn population ( in cuba coverage is in fact over 95 % ) . developed countries are increasingly resorting to dna testing for some newborn screening tests , and some are implementing tandem mass spectrometry to increase the number of conditions tested . the main challenge is to ensure accessibility to diagnostic confirmation studies , treatment and follow-up services . developing countries should : ( a ) weigh carefully their priorities in health care in general and in genetics in particular ; ( b ) consider the required infrastructure and services ; and ( c ) analyze issues of cost-effectiveness , before embarking on newborn screening programmes . medical genetic services : medical genetic services are those that provide health interventions for the prevention and management of genetic diseases . the goal of health interventions in genetics is the care and prevention of diseases with a significant genetic contribution in their causation . health interventions in genetics are organized as ( a ) medical genetic services as part of general health care services , which address primarily the care and management of individuals and families with , or at risk for , genetic diseases and congenital defects , and ( b ) as public health genetic programmes aimed at populations , with the main purpose of prevention . the essential components of genetic services and public health genetic programmes suitable for developing countries have been described in several publications . common themes in all recommendations are as follows . genetic services and public health genetic programmes should combine prevention with the best possible care for affected individuals and their families . genetic services and public health genetic programmes should prioritize simple , low technology and cost-effective activities , according to the prevalence and severity of existing genetic diseases and the expectations and cultural traditions of the community ( in a way that does not perpetuate or reinforce existing discriminatory practices ) . programmes should be focused on genetic risk detection and subsequent referral . genetic services should be rooted in primary health care , and linked with regional secondary and tertiary levels of care in a rational manner . primary health care personnel should be properly trained to perform defined tasks , such as finding out and interpreting a family history , detecting reproductive genetic risks , and detecting signs and symptoms that require referral to the next level of care . genetic testing and screening should be voluntary , offered only in the context ofcomprehensive genetics service delivery and accompanied by proper genetic counselling appropriate to the test and clinical context . proper attention must be paid to the ethical , legal and social issues associated with genetic testing and screening . from the outset it is important to dispel some common misconceptions regarding the role of genetics in health care and the relevance of these issues in developing countries . dispelling misconceptions : dispelling misconceptions misconception 1 : genetic variations are the main cause of ill health at the global level while it is true that virtually all diseases have a genetic component , it is equally true that all diseases have environmental components , and that disease is the result of environment gene interactions . in fact , and except for chromosomal abnormalities and monogenic diseases which collectively affect less than 2 % of the population anywhere in the world the bulk of morbidity and mortality largely results from environmental factors , even for diseases where genetic predispositions are significant . although the genetic constitution of individuals is important , the main reasons that the common multifactorial diseases have a larger proportional share of morbidity and mortality ( as opposed to infectious diseases and malnutrition ) in developed countries than in developing countries is precisely because of differences in environmental circumstances ( nutrition , toxic exposures , immunizations , lifestyles , sedentarism , access to healthcare , etc . ) the burden of disease in developing countries is still loaded with infectious disease and malnutrition , and aggravated by poverty and lack of access to health care , primarily prenatal and delivery services and infant care . misconception 2 : genetics is not relevant in developing countries as already stated above , and emphasized in numerous publications , genetic and congenital diseases in developing countries do exist and contribute to excessive morbidity and mortality . the fact that other scourges ( like poverty , hiv/aids , tuberculosis , malaria , malnutrition and conditions secondary to poor prenatal care and delivery conditions ) have made genetic diseases somewhat invisible thus far does not mean that the health system should neglect them . most importantly , a number of them can be prevented or managed . further , care and management should be available to all patients with genetic and congenital diseases . genetic and congenital diseases contribute to economic , social and developmental stagnation because of the severity of their manifestations , the stigmatization they engender , and the high costs of their treatment and care . misconception 3 : there is a dichotomy between care and prevention of genetic and congenital diseases from the public health point of view , care and management of these complex chronic conditions are expensive and require many human and technical resources . in this field , however , prevention of the occurrence of disease and care of the affected , go hand in hand . indeed , cost-effective prevention approaches reduce the number of affected individuals and free resources for the care of individuals with the disease . in turn , care of patients with the condition is not only an ethical obligation based on the right to health , but also increases the trust of the population in the goals of the public health system . the experience of successful programmes in cuba , cyprus , the islamic republic of iran , thailand and many more countries , supports this contention . misconception 4 : genetic testing and screening have a value in themselves , out of the context of genetic services the aggressive marketing of genetic tests without proper validation and outside the context of clinical genetic services is common both in developed and developing countries . this practice , however , is at odds with the who recommendations that genetic testing and screening should not be implemented where there are no genetic services and that genetic services should be part of health services accessible to the entire population . genetic counselling : genetic counselling is an indivisible part of the delivery of genetic services . genetic counselling has been defined as the process by which patients or relatives at risk of a disorder that may be hereditary are advised of the consequences of the disorder , the probability of developing or transmitting it and the ways this may be prevented , avoided or ameliorated and as an educational process that seeks to as- sist affected and/or at risk individuals to understand the nature of the genetic disorder , its transmission and the options open to them in management and family planning . central to the process of genetic counselling is its educational , voluntary and non-directive nature . the main goal of genetic counselling is to empower individuals and couples to make their own informed decisions when facing genetic risks , according to their own values . patients and individuals at genetic risk need unbiased and objective information on which to base difficult decisions regarding health and reproduction issues . autonomous decisions should enjoy the support of health providers . in the same way that medical practice and health care in general vary in different countries and cultures , a number of features of genetic counselling may vary . for example , in some countries genetic counselling is considered part of medical practice and provided by specially trained medical personnel ; in other countries non-physicians are trained in genetic counselling to provide the service . at present there is a shortage of health personnel adequately trained in genetic counselling in all countries , but particularly in developing countries . given the contextual differences in health care , social , cultural , religious and legal factors , the modalities for delivering genetic counselling , including the personnel who provide the service , should be left to each country to determine . defining the minimum training required for health personnel to provide genetic counselling is the basic priority . training primary health professionals ( general physicians , nurses , social workers , etc . ) in genetic counselling in developing countries would help to address these shortages . clinical genetic services : historically , clinical genetic services were developed in major hospitals in large urban centres , in both developed and developing countries , to provide diagnosis and counselling to patients with , or at risk for , genetic diseases and congenital anomalies . in developing countries , the major bottlenecks to increasing access to genetic services have been fundamentally the shortage of trained specialists , the lack of appropriate technology , the scarcity of funding and the lack of links with the primary health care level . the responsibilities of clinical genetics centres have been expanding from dealing with rare diseases to dealing with the genetic components of common diseases , particularly genetic susceptibility to cancer . in addition , medical genetic services have traditionally dealt with , and will probably continue to deal with , prevention and management of congenital anomalies , irrespective of their cause ( most congenital anomalies are environmental or multifactorial in nature ) . the challenge for developing countries is to define the type of genetic services needed according to the prevalence of genetic diseases . the development and implementation of services with a base in primary health care that follow sustainable cost-efficiency models are crucial . prenatal genetic services : prenatal genetic services are essential components of all public health programmes . these services are aimed at detecting genetic reproductive risks , through programmes such as carrier screening for prevalent recessive conditions and prenatal screening for neural tube defects and chromosomal abnormalities . experience shows that these programmes can only be successful when couples identified as at risk have access to diagnostic tests , free access to genetic counselling and the option to terminate affected pregnancies . these services should be adequately regionalized in tertiary care centres to ensure cost-efficiency and quality of service . an important limitation to the development of these services in developing countries is the prevalence of legal prohibitions that preclude selective abortion in cases of fetal abnormalities . however , this is slowly changing and abortion for fetal abnormality is now legal in a number of developing countries , such as china , cuba , cyprus , india , south africa and important localities in mexico , among others . genetic testing and screening : testing and screening are an essential component of genetic services and of public health genetic programmes . genetic testing and screening should be backed by proper genetic counselling , and should not be offered out of the broader context of health care service delivery . genetic testing and screening programmes should be implemented in a manner that is sensitive to the populations cultural practices and religious views and in accordance with national legislation . public health applications of genetics : the main goal of public health applications of genetics is the reduction of the impact of genetic disorders on health and well-being , through primary prevention , prevention through reproductive options , and secondary prevention . the following general strategies for primary prevention in genetics were identified at the meeting of who experts ( who/hgn/ waopbd ) in 1999. primary prevention : primary prevention aims to reduce the occurrence of specific genetic diseases and congenital anomalies . general strategies for primary prevention include : public efforts to improve health , nutrition , education and reproductive autonomy , particularly of women ; avoidance of unintended pregnancies and proper birth spacing through access to contraception and other methods of family planning ; improved access to , and quality of , prenatal care ; improved quality of newborn care ; control of possible occupational mutagenic risks ; voluntary premarital genetic screening and counselling ( screening should be strictly voluntary , implemented through non-directive genetic counselling , and not coerced through direct or indirect social pressures ) ; pre-conceptional and peri-conceptional supplementation of vitamins , including folic acid , for women in the reproductive age group to reduce the risk of neural tube defects and possibly other birth defects ; encouraging women to procreate at the optimum reproductive ages ( 2035 years ) to reduce the risk of non-disjunction chromosomal abnormalities ; and avoidance of exposures to mutagens and teratogens ( such as , radiation , rubella , alcohol , tobacco and self-medications ) during pregnancy . primary prevention strategies are usually centrally planned and population-based and are implemented at the level of primary care by health personnel trained in genetics and community education . perhaps the best-known application of genetic knowledge in primary prevention of congenital conditions with a genetic component is the supplementation of folic acid to women of reproductive age and the fortification of staple foods with adequate levels of folic acid in many countries . this approach is based on the knowledge that neural tube defects are due in part to a deficiency of folic acid . significant reduction in the prevalence of neural tube defects at birth has consistently followed these interventions . prevention of exposure to mutagens , teratogens and other environmental toxins should have a larger role in public health than currently accomplished . prevention based on reproductive options : most public health applications of genetics have so far been directed at the prevention and control of chromosomal abnormalities and of specific recessive conditions particularly prevalent in defined populations . chromosomal abnormalities : chromosomal abnormalities affect approximately 1 in 200 live newborns and are a common cause of congenital malformations and mental retardation . they are largely non-hereditary , that is , they occur sporadically , without significant ethnic , socioeconomic or geographic variations , worldwide . maternal age is positively correlated with the prevalence at birth of the most common type of chromosomal abnormalities : the autosomal trisomies like down syndrome and the sex chromosome aneuploidies . the effect of maternal age is so strong that for over 30 years it has been the basis for selecting pregnancies at increased risk for chromosomal abnormalities ( usually those above 35 years of age ) as targets of preventive public health programmes . in addition , a number of biochemical markers in maternal blood and fetal ultrasound markers are now also used to identify pregnancies at increased risk of chromosomal abnormalities ( usually over 0.5 % ) . the preventive model followed by health care systems in developed countries is to institute such prenatal screening as part of routine prenatal care , followed by the offer of voluntary prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis on fetal cells obtained by chorionic villus sampling ( cvs ) at 10 weeks or amniocentesis at 14-16 weeks of gestation . these programmes should be implemented according to the principles of voluntariness , non-directive genetic counselling and informed consent . whether or not these principles are actually adhered to in practice , is discussed later in the report . these programmes have been very effective in significantly reducing the prevalence at birth of chromosomal abnormalities in developed countries . in developing countries these services are often not implemented in a way that maximizes public access or cost-effectiveness ; they are often available and accessible only to the wealthier 20 % of the population . recessive conditions : the public health model followed worldwide for the prevention of recessive genetic conditions prevalent in particular populations follows the sequence : ( a ) detection of carriers of the particular gene through genetic screening ; ( b ) ascertainment of carrier-carrier couples and subsequent genetic counselling ; ( c ) offer of prenatal diagnosis in pregnancy , and ( d ) offer of termination of affected pregnancies . this model requires that : ( a ) the condition is particularly prevalent in the defined population ; ( b ) the condition causes a significant health and economic burden to society ; ( c ) dna testing and prenatal diagnosis for the condition is available , cost-effective and equitably accessible through the health system to everyone at risk ; ( d ) there is a preventive public health policy based on voluntary decisions by the public with proper respect for reproductive rights ; ( e ) there are adequate plans for treatment of individuals with the condition without stigmatization or discrimination ; and ( f ) there are appropriate human resources for non-directive genetic counselling to all individuals and couples identified as being at high genetic risk . these requirements have been met in a number of countries or population groups for several recessive conditions ( this list is not complete ) : thalassaemia in cyprus , greece , italy and immigrant groups in the united king-dom , and more recently in thailand and the islamic republic of iran ; sickle cell disease in cuba ; sickle cell disease and thalassaemia in the united states ; and tay sachs disease and other recessive dis-eases common in ashkenazi jews . secondary prevention : secondary prevention aims to minimize the clinical manifestations of a genetic condition after the birth of an affected infant ; or to detect a genetic predisposition for a condition that presents later in life . the most important application of genetics in secondary prevention and early detection of genetic diseases is exemplified in newborn screening , whereby all newborns in a population are subjected to systematic testing for a list of specified conditions . the inclusion of a particular condition for screening in newborns depends on a number of factors , including the impact of that condition on the publics health , the feasibility of accurate and cost-effective screening and diagnostic methods , and the effectiveness of treatment , with a much better outcome if started immediately after birth . it is expected , then , that the conditions screened vary from country to country , and even within countries , as is the case in the united states , in which each state determines the conditions it screens for . typical conditions screened at birth are phenylketonuria , congenital hypothyroidism , haemoglobinopathies , cystic fibrosis and congenital deafness . newborn screening should be implemented as a public health programme , run by the public health system , which covers all steps in the sequence : screening ( of all newborns ) ; diagnostic confirmation ( of those newborns who screened positive ) ; referral for proper care ( usually lifelong ) ; and genetic counselling for the parents . genetics and genomics have so far played little role in newborn screening as the technologies for screening are biochemical or immunological . however , diagnostic confirmation of those screened positive relies increasingly upon dna techniques , and it is expected that genomics will play an ever increasing role in all steps of newborn screening . whether or not a country needs to institute a newborn screening programme is a matter of high complexity that should be decided by a vigorous analysis of the epidemiology of specific conditions technically amenable to screening . consideration must also be given to economic and social factors in addition to alternative options for the use of scarce health funds . challenges : the specific barriers to increasing the equitable provision of genetic services in developing countries vary according to local community , region and country . there are , however , common themes that affect most developing countries . these include poverty ; scarcity of trained health professionals ; low priority given to genetic services by policy-makers ; and cultural and religious factors including ethnicity , language , gender norms and practices , and geographic isolation . tensions may exist between providing treatment and focusing on the prevention of disease , which is exacerbated by the fact that the impact of preventive programmes can be difficult to measure in the absence of sound epidemiological data . barriers also include lack of education ( low literacy rates and little or no knowledge about genetics ) and misconceptions at the public , medical and health policy planning levels . the list below , compiled from results of a who consultation on genetic services in latin america , highlights the main barriers to effective and equitable genetic testing and screening programmes , and is applicable to most other developing countries . these are : competing health priorities , as the burden of other unmet health needs resulting from infectious disease , malnutrition , prenatal care , labour and delivery care and neonatal care remain ; opinion among the medical profession and public health officials that genetics is not a health priority ; misconceptions that genetic services are expensive and relevant only to rare dis-eases ; lack of understanding of the full range of options available for prevention of genetic disease , with prevention often misperceived as being limited to the abortion of affected fetuses ; and insufficient public education about genetic risks and the range of preventive options . it is important to note that the first of these barriers is a legitimate concern . developing countries face range of unmet health needs and this report doesn ’ t advocate prioritizing genetic diseases above all other demands on health resources . a just and fair health system will : ( a ) consider the burden of genetic disease in proportion to the total burden of ill health ; ( b ) consider the potential strategies to address it ; and ( c ) distribute resources accordingly.it follows that sound epidemiological data are required to assess these needs . the resources devoted to medical genetic services compared to other health services will vary from country to country depending on the needs and resources of their populations . the final four barriers listed above demonstrate where the problem lies . health planners are notable to weigh fairly the demands of genetic disease control against other health needs because the prevalence and burden of genetic diseases is under-recognized , and prevention is misconceived as expensive and dependent on sophisticated technologies . again the importance of sound epidemiological data should be emphasized : in the absence of adequate data it is hard to convince policy-makers of the need for , and impact of , genetic services . this report attempts to dispel these misconceptions , as have other publications . the case studies and other examples discussed throughout the text , demonstrate the innovative , varied , culturally sensitive , cost-effective ways that genetic screening and testing have been used in developing countries to improve public health . cost-effectiveness : cost-effectiveness analysis ( cea ) is an analytical method of illuminating the trade-offs inherent indecisions regarding scarce health care resources and competing health demands . the point of cea is to display which , among a range of alternatives , either : ( a ) maximizes the desirable consequences , given a fixed set of resources , or ( b ) minimizes the cost in order to achieve a desired outcome . in the context of health policy , cea is usually employed to compare alternative courses of action that result in similar health benefits , in order to compare which is the most cost-effective . the results of a cea feed into the macro-allocation issues of priority setting in health care . genetics/genomics research and public health : common chronic diseases of adult life are responsible for a high proportion of the public health burden worldwide . it can confidently be stated that most common chronic diseases have a genetic component , conferred by variant versions of many genes , each one with small causal effect . their occurrence is the result of complex environment gene interaction . this concept includes infectious diseases , where variations in the human genome may explain differences in clinical responses to the infectious agent . the main role of genetics/genomics thus far is in the development of much better genetically-based diagnostic tools for many diseases with a discernible genetic component . similarly , genetics/genomics is playing an increasing role in the diagnosis of infections , as tools are developed to identify infectious agents by their dna footprints . furthermore , there is the potential of pinpointing the genetic predispositions for common diseases like coronary arteriosclerosis , some types of cancer , some types of dementia , diabetes and hypertension , among others . this assertion , however , does not deny that environmental factors ( exposure to mutagens and other toxics and teratogens , smoking , unhealthy diet , lack of physical exercise , stress , etc . ) are , and will continue to be , the major factors in disease expression , even for some conditions classically considered genetic ( like sickle cell disease or cystic fibrosis ) . prevention and treatment of diseases , in which genes play a significant role ( particularly in common adult diseases ) rely , and will continue to rely , on the control of adverse environmental factors . this realization is essential to avoid reductionist approaches to the prevention and control of conditions of public health significance that have a genetic component in their causation . nevertheless , and given that common conditions with a genetic component contribute heavily to the global burden of disease , it is logical to expect that genetics and genomics will have a significant role to play in their prevention and control in public health , both in developed and developing nations . genomic research and epidemiology : epidemiology as a discipline is at the scientific core of public health , involved primarily in studying the distribution and determinants of health-related states or events in populations and the application of these studies to control health problems . epidemiology is concerned with determining the risk factors for diseases , identifying those at highest risk , and evaluating the effectiveness of health interventions . in turn , genomics is concerned with determining the effect of variations in the human genome on the risk of disease . thus , the two disciplines blend in the field of genomic epidemiology , which studies how genetic factors influence the occurrence of disease in populations and families . a related field is molecular epidemiology , which looks at the occurrence of disease through the study of biological markers of exposures , susceptibilities and effects . the fields of genomic epidemiology and molecular epidemiology rely increasingly on high technology tools such as dna microarrays and gene expression profiles . these techniques enable the study of thousands of genes simultaneously , in order to determine the effects of gene variations on disease as well as the effects of environmental factors on the genome and its expression . epidemiological methods are essential to quantify the impact of gene variants on the risk of disease and its phenotypic manifestations and to measure the effect of environmental risk factors that interact with gene variants to cause disease . further , epidemiology is the appropriate tool to assess the clinical validity of new genetic tests ( often this does not occur and tests are put on the market with inadequate proof of their validity in predicting the risk of disease ) . finally , epidemiological methods permit the monitoring of genetic test utilization in the population and of the effects of genetic knowledge on the health of different populations . the role of genome epidemiology is thus to : use genetic variants routinely in the study of gene environment interactions in disease ; use biological markers of exposure , susceptibility and outcomes ; evaluate allelic variants in relation to health outcomes ; evaluate genes as disease risk factors to provide a basis for assessing clinical validity of genetic tests for disease susceptibility . in sum , genomic epidemiology can determine the scientific validity of purported gene disease associations . genetics and genomics research applied to health care some of the key objectives of current genetics/ genomics research applied to health care are to identify : human genome variants associated with susceptibility to common non-communi-cable diseases ; human genome variants associated with immune responses to infectious agents , which may influence individual susceptibility or resistance to infections or deter- mine abnormal responses which may lead to chronic autoimmune diseases ; and human genome variants involved in the metabolic pathways of drugs and medications , which may explain individual variations in the responses to these agents ( pharmacogenomics ) . as useful as such research may prove to be in providing new means of preventing , diagnosing and treating diseases , some public experts are concerned that excessive emphasis on unproven genomic approaches to disease prevention may divert scarce resources from generally applicable public health measures ( promotion of good diet , regular exercise , smoking cessation , etc . ) which in spite of being well proven are not fully applied , particularly in developing countries . additionally , it is unclear whether genomic research will lead to improved approaches for disease prevention and health promotion at the population level . this research requires genetic screening and testing of individuals , families and populations to uncover the role of genomic variations in health and disease . genetic epidemiology enables a scientific assessment of the real validity of genetic screening and testing in disease prevention and health promotion . conclusion : compared with developed nations , developing countries are burdened by high levels of poverty and structural deficiencies ; and their resources to combat disease and promote health are scarce . disease profiles in these countries are characterized by a higher proportion of nutritional , infectious and social conditions leading to ill health and death . superimposed on this reality , there is an increasing visibility of diseases traditionally associated with developed countries ( namely , congenital conditions and non-communicable diseases ) . facing this hard reality , developing countries must carefully assess their disease burden , set their priorities and use their scarce health budgets wisely , making sure that the prevention and care of genetic and congenital conditions is not neglected and finds an appropriate place among other health priorities . a number of who-convened advisory groups have articulated the criteria for applying genetics and genomics to the health problems of developing countries . the following are the main recommendations for developing countries resulting from the who/hgn/waobdp meeting of experts convened . need to recognize the burden imposed by genetic disorders and birth defects . need for political will and commitment to support the implementation of genetic services . improve epidemiological knowledge about genetic disorders and birth defects . define the goals of genetic services in terms of both individual/family well-being and public health . improve prenatal and perinatal services . organize genetic services in a comprehensive and integrated manner , with roots in the primary health care level . select programmes and targets according to prevalence , severity and predicted outcomes . respect ethical principles and cultural diversity . train health professionals in medical genetics . educate the public in genetics . encourage the formation of parent/patient organizations . discussion : ethical , legal and social issues : medical genetics is the field of medicine most centrally involved in providing services to people with genetic disorders and to their families . as defined by who consultants , the goals of medical genetic services are : to help people with a genetic disadvantage and their families to live and re-produce as normally as possible , to make informed choices in reproductive and health matters , to assist people in obtaining access to relevant medical services ( diagnostic , therapeutic , rehabilitative or preventive ) or social support systems , to help them adapt to their unique situation , and to become informed on new relevant developments . medical genetic services include services that encompass all or most aspects of genetic testing , from genetic screening , to referral for testing , through to testing , post-test counselling and treatment . there are a number of ways in which genetic information is considered to be different from other health information , although the degree and impact of these differences remain under discussion . for example : ( a ) genetic information may have medical and social implications for an entire family , rather than only the affected individual ; ( b ) genetic discoveries may be predictive of future adverse health events for an individual or family member who is currently unaffected ; and ( c ) genetic information and the choices made in the present may affect future generations . these features of genetic information generate specific ethical considerations , particularly concerning the implementation of medical genetic services . ethics is a field of philosophy concerned with articulating moral values and rules for action , and with analyzing and resolving conflicts among these values and rules . bioethics is the study of ethical , social , legal , philosophical and other related issues arising in health care and the biological sciences . the following four principles , outlined in the who 2001 review of ethical issues in medical genetics , are widely accepted as philosophical tenets of bioethics : justice : treating persons and groups equitably , and distributing benefits and burdens of health care as fairly as possible in society . autonomy : respecting the self-determination of individuals and protecting those persons with diminished autonomy . beneficence : giving highest priority to the welfare of persons and maximizing benefits to their health . non-maleficence : avoiding and preventing harm to persons or , at least , minimizing harm . the ethical issues arising in relation to genetic testing and screening in developing countries can not be readily compartmentalized according to these principles , because the issues often involve questions relating to more than one principle . throughout the report we will highlight the impact of certain social , medical and legal practices on the realization of these principles . introduction : achieving justice is the primary ethical issue in relation to the development of medical genetic services in developing countries . justice involves : ( a ) balancing genetic services against other population health needs , and ( b ) equitable and safe access to genetic services once they have been introduced . from this theoretical platform , this section moves to some of the relevant features of the social context common to a number of developing countries , which affect the implementation of medical genetic services in health care . for example , because reproduction predominantly occurs within marriage , marriage structures and preferences ( for example consanguineous marriage ) can affect the rate of expression of recessive genetic diseases , and can conversely provide opportunities ( for example , arranged marriage ) for screening , testing and counselling . religion can affect the acceptability of certain services associated with genetic testing , namely termination of pregnancy . abortion for medical reasons is a controversial issue ; this section examines where and under what circumstances it is legally permitted ; and look at the problem of unsafe abortions , particularly in countries where abortion is illegal . gender is another relevant feature of the social context because traditional gender roles and gender inequality can affect reproductive decisions and patterns of discrimination within a community . the combination of genetic screening , arranged marriage and gender inequality generates a specific concern about the stigmatization of female carriers of genetic diseases and the potential for discrimination in marriage because the process of formal marriage introductions presents opportunities to exclude these female carriers . the report considers different examples of community-specific responses to this concern . an important tool in preventing discrimination and stigmatization more generally is the protection of patients privacy and confidentiality . we look at the relevant regulations introduced in some developing countries to protect medical , and specifically genetic , information . further tool to prevent discrimination and stigmatization is public education . genetic information can be complex and difficult to understand , and as discussed above , it can have special implications for the patients future health , for the health of their children , and for other family members . for these reasons , patient and public education and engagement are essential components of medical genetic services . genetic testing and screening should be supported by public education , and genetic counselling should be made available to patients and communities . to effectively integrate medical genetic services into public health more generally , primary health care providers such as physicians and nurses need to be able to recognize those at risk of genetic conditions , be aware of the genetic services available , and refer patients to the appropriate facilities . this section finishes with a discussion of patient safety and well-being . in a sense , patient well-being encompasses many of the topics discussed previously , as all aim to reduce or prevent harm to patients and their families ( non-maleficence ) and benefit patients ( beneficence ) . however , this subsection looks specifically at quality assurance mechanisms in place in developing countries and the implications of commercial genetic testing for patient safety and well-being . the topics covered in this report do not form an exhaustive analysis of all of the elsi of medical genetic services . rather , the report highlights some of the more significant ethical challenges faced by those developing countries that are establishing genetic services , giving priority to topics not comprehensively covered in previous reports . similarly , the examples included do not cover all countries . the report as a whole provides examples from a selection of different countries and regions.as is widely acknowledged , epidemiological and project evaluation data are lacking for many developing countries ; the range of the countries covered in the report has been constrained by the examples available in the literature . to help provide an up-to-date picture of the ethical issues currently associated with genetic services in developing countries , the report includes five case studies based on background papers commissioned specifically for the report from geneticists working in developing countries . each case study highlights a primary concept covered in the report ; but also encompass a wide range of other ethical , legal and social issues in the context of that country . justice todays global health situation raises urgent questions about justice . in some parts of the world there is a continued expectation of longer and more comfortable life , while in many others there is despair over the failure to control dis-ease although the means to do so exist . the issue of equitable access to genetic services must be considered against the backdrop of existing global health inequalities . the benefits of modern medicine have still not reached many parts of the developing world . as noted in the introduction , many developing countries now suffer the double burden of infectious disease and malnutrition in combination with increasing rates of chronic disease . the vast majority of global research funds are spent on diseases that account for only a small proportion of the global disease burden . the term the 10/90 gap refers to the fact that less than 10 % of the worldwide expenditure on health research and development is devoted to the major health problems of 90 % of the population.in the context of such large and steadily increasing global health inequalities , there is significant concern that health benefits drawn from future developments in genomics and genetics will not be shared with the developing world , in 1985 , a who advisory group on hereditary diseases concluded that the broadest of the real ethical issues is the limited availability of genetic services . as a result , women bear seriously affected children , and the situation is exacerbated by the realization that it could have been avoided . justice is one of the four foundational bioethical principles . the concept of justice relies on the idea of fair and equitable treatment in light of what persons are owed or entitled to . equity can be understood as the state of being just , impartial and fair . formal justice demands that equals be treated equally and unequal ’ s be treated differently . the principle of formal justice disallows arbitrary , unjustified distinctions between things or people who should be considered equal . as is discussed in more detail below , the failure to weigh fairly the need for medical genetic services against other health services is a breach of the formal principle of justice . medical genetic services may be rejected because of the erroneous assumption that they are always complex and expensive . policy-makers have a duty to consider the growing evidence regarding the cost-effectiveness of medical genetic services in developing countries . for the purposes of this discussion , we use the term justice to refer to distributive justice , defined as the fair , equitable and appropriate distribution of benefits and burdens within a society . benefits and burdens can be interpreted very broadly , including : rights and obligations ; opportunities and barriers ; and access or restriction to resources ( including services , facilities , money and taxation , among others ) . questions of justice are exacerbated by conditions of scarcity , where the resources required to meet essential needs must be divided fairly between competing demands . considerations of justice , in the context of medical services , cover the macro-allocation issues of which medical services and goods should be provided , and micro-allocation questions of who should have access to these services and on what basis . the allocation of health resources should maximize the benefits from limited resources and distribute those benefits fairly . challenges it is important to note that , in some cases , the neglect and underutilization of genetic testing and screening options is an ethical failure . to ignore the evidence of the burden of congenital disorders , or any other demonstrable health burden , and to rely on the false assumption that genetic services are always sophisticated and demanding , is to fail to adhere to the principle of distributive justice . evidence regarding the control of congenital anomalies should be compared to the evidence for competing health priorities . failure to do this results in harm occurring that could have been prevented . in turn , failing to prevent avoidable harm breaches : ( a ) the principle of non-maleficence and ( b ) the principle of distributive justice , because it distributes health care burdens unfairly within the community . case study 1 : newborn screening in brazil ( 2001-ongoing ) . in brazil , there are no dedicated governmental programmes for the prevention , diagnosis , registration , or treatment of the majority of genetic diseases . since 1992 , however , the public single health system sistema nico de sade , suswas responsible for neonatal screening to diagnose phenylketonuria and hypothyroidism . however , its provision of screening services varied by region and did not include facilities for diagnostic confirmation , clinical evaluation , treatment , family education or genetic counselling.in response to these limitations , in 2001 the ministry of health established the national newborn screening program programa nacional de triagem neonatal , pntn . in 2002 , 65 % of all newborns were screened . the brazilian government has made a commitment to providing resources for the early diagnosis , treatment and follow-up for disorders caused by inborn errors of metabolism . the ministry of health is currently focused on the goal of 100 % newborn screening . data from 2003 indicated that the total cost of the pntn was u $ 15.2 million and the total number of newborns screened was estimated to be 2 360 960 , which equates to approximately u $ 6.4 per newborn screened . description of the project the pntns specific aims are to ensure equitable access to genetic screening for all brazilian newborns ; reduce morbidity and mortality as a result of genetic diseases ; organize state screening networks ; ensure therapy and follow-up for each disorder detected ; provide guidelines to standardize regional services ; and create and support a national newborn screening database to collect epidemiological data . the pntn has been operating nationally since 2001 and is run by municipal and state health offices under the guidance of the ministry of health . technical team was established to develop , evaluate and assess quality and safety standards . as a result of cooperation between the three governmental levels , the pntn has organized the state screening network in 24 states , and the federal district . the state screening network includes collecting stations in all municipalities that have maternity hospital , which must be under the control of reference services ( no less than one per state ) . maternity hospital , which must be under the control of reference services ( no less than one per state ) . the pntn was implemented in three stages due to existing regional inequalities in health care structure : stage 1 , testing for hypothyroidism and phenylketonuria , for which testing is legally compulsory and is available in all 24 states of brazil , and the federal district ; stage 2 , testing for hemoglobin diseases , for which 13 states are now capable of screening ; stage 3 , testing for cystic fibrosis , which is available in the 3 states with the most developed screening structures already in place . a prerequisite for transition from stage 2 to stage 3 is the demonstration of 70 % screening coverage of newborns in the state for stage 1 and 2 conditions . a state wishing to transition must also show epidemiological data justifying the need for stage 3 screening . each state must have at least one reference service , a centre that identifies conditions for diagnosis , treatment , follow-up and genetic counselling . reference services are in charge of collecting and managing samples , and receiving and registering patients ; and they are also responsible for integrating services with the health assistance network to ensure general health support . each service must minimally consist of a pediatrician , an endocrinologist , a nutritionist , a psychologist and a social worker . the inclusion of a clinical geneticist is officially recommended , although not compulsory , due to the lack of clinical geneticists in some regions . challenges : after almost four years , initial evaluations show that the pntn has been successful in some regions . however , many regional public health care services are not able to fulfil all the programme requirements . after the implementation of the programme in 23 states , almost half of the teams did not have enough experience in newborn screening , and two-thirds did not include a member with any training in , understanding of , genetic counselling . the state screening network has designed a training programme to ensure that all teams have appropriately trained staff to fill each of the required roles . states with few or no genetic , clinical or laboratory facilities have found it financially challenging to meet the requirements of the programme . clinical protocols and therapeutic guidelines are being developed to standardize the delivery of services , and the ministry of health is providing financial support for buying and distributing medications and dietary supplements to support treatment . finally , the process of coordinating all levels of government vertically ( national , state and local ) and horizontally ( across a developing country the size of brazil ) has been politically challenging . in response , the ministry of health technical team is engaged in a national campaign to ensure the involvement and support of state and local public health officials . clinical protocols and therapeutic guidelines are also being developed to standardize the delivery of services . ethical , legal and social issues raised by the project : there are still challenges in the oversight and standardization of genetics services in brazil , and a specific concern is the shortage of clinical geneticists . further , there is no official system of genetic counselling in brazil and the current resources of newborn screening teams do not allow for regular genetic counselling . the pntn procedures do not include an informed consent process , and parents are often informed about newborn screening shortly after the birth and without sufficient information about the scope of screening or the potential social and medical consequences . identification of misassigned paternity is not uncommon during newborn screening and is sometimes handled im-properly . stigmatization , genetic discrimination , and breaches of privacy have occurred , particularly in relation to the detection of sickle cell carriers . there has been controversy among physicians , health care workers , sickle cell disease associations and african descendants associations over how best to handle information on individuals who are carriers for sickle cell disease . samples are collected and stored ; however , there are no specific rules regarding their use in the future and it ap-pears that their privacy is not always adequately protected . the federal district refers to the brazilian capital , which has the status of a state . brazil therefore has 27 federal units consisting of 26 states and one federal district . cost-effectiveness : an issue that is specific to genetic conditions in developing countries is the persisting misconception that medical genetic services depend on sophisticated , expensive technologies unsuited to the developing world context . we will therefore present some of the evidence that demonstrates medical genetic services can be cost-effective in developing countries . cost-effectiveness is analyzed in two ways . prospective analysis of cost-effectiveness is applied where there is no programme in place , but the efficacy of such a programme is predicted from known data . the difficulty with such analysis is that much of the data used is only an estimate , for example of the anticipated rate of uptake of screening , or the expected rate of termination of identified affected fetuses . in some countries , the cost of lifetime treatment for the genetic condition in question has never been measured , and therefore an estimate is again used . the preferable alternatives retrospective analysis , where a programme is analyzed after either the full programme or a pilot programme has been implemented and data generated and collected . in practice , both types of analysis are used : prospective , to argue for the implementation of a trial or pilot programme ; and retrospective , to argue for the expansion and continuation of the programme . country example 1 cost-effectiveness analysis of fragile x screening in israel : a prospective analysis of a proposed fragile x ( an x- linked genetic syndrome that is a leading identifiable cause of mental retardation ) carrier screening programme in israel was based on four figures : ( 1 ) data regarding the prevalence of fragile x syndrome in families with no history of fragile x or mental retardation ( 1 women in 113 is estimated to be a pre-mutation carrier ) ; ( 2 ) the cost of lifetime care for an individual with mental retardation , estimated at us $ 680 000 ; ( 3 ) an estimated 50 % acceptance rate of the screening programme ; and ( 4 ) an estimated 100 % termination of affected pregnancies . estimates were based on data from israel and/or the netherlands . ( for example the actual cost of lifetime care for mental retardation in israel is not known and estimates were based on the cost of care in the netherlands similar in size and with a comparable system of social medicine to israel . these estimates were adjusted relative to the respective gdps of the two countries . ) these estimates showed that the expected net benefit of running a fragile x screening programme in israel is a saving of approximately us $ 5.5 million per annum . this preliminary analysis shows that a programme for fragile x screening should be cost-effective in israel . the establishment of a pilot screening programme would provide an opportunity to collect specific israeli data to better estimate cost-effectiveness on a national scale . country example 3 : cost-effectiveness analysis of family-based ( cascade ) screening in pakistan targeting extended families for screening is an efficient model of genetic screening in communities where there are high rates of consanguineous marriage . one study of cascade screening for haemoglobin disorders in pakistan demonstrated that extended family screening can yield a large amount of useful information about carriers and couples at risk . all identified carriers in this study reported having used the information provided to them during the genetic counselling and testing process for family planning purposes . although family-based screening involves considerable labour in terms of collecting family medical information , it can identify a subpopulation who are at risk for the disorder , and thus avoids the need to screen much larger populations . it thus excludes some individuals from unnecessary testing , which can conserve the limited resources of developing countries . labour costs are relative to a country ’ s resources and are therefore comparatively low in developing countries . in-stead , it is the cost of reagents that is the primary financial barrier to screening for many developing countries . the labor-intensive aspect of cascade screening may therefore not be a serious cost concern . as a result , cascade screening , which places higher demands on staff time but lower demands on the use of reagents ( the re-verse of population screening ) , presents a cost-effective alternative for many developing countries . family-based screening can also be more effective , as it decreases the likelihood that affected individuals will be missed . in addition , family-based screening overcome some of the barriers present in population screening that result from limited public education about genetic disorders , because family members have often had personal contact with someone with the disease ( 4 ) .country example 2 cost-effectiveness analysis of thalassemia screening in hongkong sar , china the prenatal screening programme for a thalassaemia and -thalassaemia in hongkong sarwas retrospectively analysed for cost-effectiveness in 2004. since 1995 , universal prenatal screening for thalassaemia has been offered at tsan yuk hospital . over the course of the programme , 18 of 19 affected fetuses were terminated , representing a 95 % preference for termination . the total cost of the programme to date ( hk $ 10 million ) was far less than the expected postnatal service cost for 18 individuals with -thalassaemia ( hk $ 40.4 million ) . the post- natal service cost was based on the cost of managing a patient with -thalassaemia major for 45 years , including bone marrow transplant/cord blood stem cell trans-plant , which equates to hk $ 2.7 million per patient . it was concluded that the programme was cost-effective due to the high prevalence of thalassaemia in the area . the following example of family-based screening in pakistan ( country example 3 ) illustrates how different social contexts can vary the outcome of a cea in relation to specific genetic services . ethical issues cea assumes a consequentialist moral standard . consequentialism ( one form of which is utilitarianism ) is a moral theory that advocates only one basic principle of ethics : to maximize benefits and minimize harm . most ethical criticisms of cea stem from critiques of consequentialist moral theory generally , and include questions about : ( a ) the construction of cea in health care : such as , whose values should be used to define the desirable outcomes ( for example , comparing impaired functions with shortened lives or no life at all ) ? ( b ) questions of distributive justice in the use of cea in a priority setting : such as , when should small benefits to a large number of persons be prioritized over large benefits to a small number of persons ( for example : where rare genetic conditions cause severe suffering and hard- ship within a limited number of affected families ) ? attempting to maximize the health outcomes of a society as a whole , with limited resources , necessarily involves deciding between the health services required by one group and the health services required by another , whether these groups are defined geographically or in terms of health needs . as illustrated by the brazilian newborn screening programme , distributing scarce resources equitably and in a cost-effective manner can be very challenging . should medical genetic services be located in urban centres where they reach the most people or distributed throughout the country so that families in rural communities also have access to the services ? locating services in urban centres is likely to improve the health outcomes of the population as a whole , but it is also likely to widen the gap between the health outcomes of urban and rural communities . this example demonstrates the tension between cost-effectiveness and health maximization on the one hand , and the principle of equity on the other . cea of prenatal testing and screening one issue relevant to prenatal genetic screening the evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of this kind of medical service . necessarily such screening has to evaluate the costs and benefits of early detection of serious genetic and/or congenital disorders . there are moral implications in choosing whether to evaluate programmes involving prenatal diagnosis in terms of parents opportunity to make an informed decision , including the decision to end an affected pregnancy . a key controversy in this debate is how if at all to value lives . for instance , it can be argued that evaluating prevention of disease or disability involves evaluating a prenatal decision that the quality of life of a ( future ) person would be worse than non-existence . aside from the difficult technical problems involved in making this comparison , many people are uncomfortable with the conceptual problems involved in the tangled process of evaluating burden of disease , when entwined with evaluating the value of a life . conclusion : cost-effectiveness analysis can play an important role in macro-allocation decisions , but these data must be weighed against issues of equity and access . the brazilian newborn screening programme demonstrated that achieving a balance between cost-effectiveness and equitable access can be difficult . the ethical debate surrounding the rationing of scare health care resources , and cea in particular , is complex and in many cases far from resolution however three points can be made : evidence relating to the cost-effectiveness of interventions should play an important role in health resource prioritization . intent of finding the least costly way to deliver effective care and maximize health outcomes can be congruent with the principle of distributive justice , and represents an important technique for health care systems with limited resources . however , the health policy process must consider not only the impact of different policies on health expenditure and population health outcomes , but also the distribution of improved health outcomes be-tween different groups . 3. in the absence of consensus , a fair process for determining a legitimate distribution of health care resources is necessary . a list of the elements of fair process is available in appendix c. the fair process model mirrors many of the elements of effective genetic testing and screening services that will be raised throughout the report : community consultation and education ; active dialogue with relevant stakeholders ; and ongoing responsiveness to community needs . social context : this section will take a more in-depth look at the features of the social context in some developing countries that affect both the need for genetic testing and screening services , and the acceptance and use of these services in specific communities . the elements of the social context discussed include traditional cultural patterns of marriage ; religion ; the legality of , and access to , safe abortion ; and gender issues . the purpose of this section is not to discuss the features of the social context as barriers that must be overcome before genetic services can be implemented ; rather it is to illustrate the framework within which genetic services should be developed . with cooperation between cultural , religious and political leaders , and in full consideration of the social context , genetic services can be developed that are applicable and effective within different social contexts . it is important not to simply transfer systems for delivering genetic services established in developed countries to contexts in developing countries where they may not be appropriate . marriage : cultural traditions such as consanguineous and endogamous marriage can have an impact on the prevalence of recessive genetic diseases within a community , and therefore affect the need for genetic services such as testing and screening . further way in which marriage norms can impinge on genetic services is the process of arranged marriage , which can affect the culturally appropriate time to conduct carrier screening . some communities may use social constructions of kinship in addition to biological constructions , for example , referring to someone as uncle when they are neither a genetic relative nor a member of the extended family by marriage . this can have an impact on genetic counselling , highlighting the importance that counsellors have the ability to understand the social circumstances of the clients , including for example the distinction between social and biological concepts of relatedness . social concepts can likewise affect the family ’ s understanding of genetic inheritance . consanguinity and concepts of relatedness should be viewed as an integral part of the social and cultural framework within which genetic services must work . consanguineous marriage : consanguineous kinship is characterized by the sharing of common ancestors . the word is derived from the latin com sanguineus , of common blood . two or more individuals are said to be consanguineous if they have a common recent ancestor ( usually not further back than three or four generations ) . in clinical genetics , a consanguineous marriage is most typically defined as occurring between a couple related as second cousin or closer ( resulting in a coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) in the progeny of f is equal to 0.0156 ) . the coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) measures the probability that a person with two identical alleles of the same gene received both alleles from a common ancestor . f is therefore determined by the genetic relationship between the parents , and what proportion of their genetic material is shared . consanguineous marriage is practiced for cultural and economic reasons that vary among communities . however , motivations that arecommon among consanguineous communities include strengthening family ties and the maintenance of family property , especially landholdings ; reduced requirement for dowry ; and the belief that the bride will enjoy a more harmonious relationship with her in-laws . relationship between consanguineous marriage and genetic diseases most people carry a number of recessive disease alleles but , because they are rare in the general population , there is a very low chance of two carriers reproducing and producing affected offspring . consanguineous marriage is associated with an increased prevalence of recessive genetic diseases and infant mortality . when close relatives mate , the chance that both will carry the same recessive allele for a trait is higher , and therefore they are more likely to have a child who is homozygous for that trait . however , it is important to recognize that most recessive characteristics are harmless ; only a minority are associated with major diseases . consanguinity in and of itself does not cause disease ; it only increases the chance that reproduction will occur between two carriers for the same recessive genetic conditions . the recognition that recessive conditions occur at a higher rate in consanguineous communities can facilitate the early identification of carriers and carrier couples ( as discussed in country example 3 on family-based screening in pakistan ) . carrier couples in a randomly mating population are often only identified after the birth of an affected child . however , in a consanguineous community extended family studies can make the identification of carrier couples much simpler . early identification of carrier couples allows for premarital or preconception counselling and the avoidance of affected births . it is not possible to provide data regarding the absolute risk associated with consanguinity because the risk depends on the prevalence of recessive alleles in the particular community , i.e . the background community risk . the only meaningful data therefore is the risk relative to non-consanguineous couples in the same community . available data regarding the impact of consanguineous relationships on the prevalence of recessive genetic conditions indicate that this risk varies considerably both between communities and at the individual family level . empirical studies involving the progeny of first cousins have indicated that morbidity levels are between 0.7 % and 7.5 % higher than in the offspring of unrelated couples . on average worldwide there is about a 4-5 % increase in the risk of premature mortality among the offspring of first cousin unions . available data demonstrate that with each 0.01 increase in the coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) , the birth prevalence of infants with recessively inherited diseases increases by about 7/1000 . prevalence of consanguinity : many communities in north and sub-saharan africa , the middle east and west , central and south asia exhibit a strong cultural preference for consanguineous marriage . even in regions and countries where consanguinity is common , there is a wide variation between subgroups . pakistan , for example , has very high levels of consanguinity : a national study in the early 1990s found an average rate of 62 % . however smaller surveys of subpopulations have indicated rates of 30-76 % . saudi culture also exhibits a strong preference for consanguineous marriage : the current average rate in saudi arabia is 58 % ; but this varies by region from a low of 34 % to a high of 80 % . in jordan the frequency of consanguineous marriage ranges from 50-66 % . in the kingdom of bahrain , the rate of consanguinity in 1995 was 39 % , although from 46 % consanguinity in the previous generation . the size of the potential marriage pool may affect the observed levels of consanguineous marriage in the population . in small communities , prospective non-consanguineous pairings may be limited . as a result , the prevalence of consanguineous marriages may be elevated irrespective of the cultural and social preferences for consanguinity . although there is a preference for consanguineous marriage in many countries , in others , marriage between close relatives is legislatively prohibited . under chinese law , for example , marriage is generally prohibited between relatives of first and second degrees of kinship , which includes first cousin marriages and uncle/niece and aunt/nephew marriages . however , first cousin unions in china may be permissible for members of communities that traditionally have practiced consanguinity . the hindu marriage act in india bans uncle/niece marriage , but a study of marriage patterns in parts of southern india revealed that more than 21 % of hindu marriages were between uncles and nieces . under islamic law , uncle/niece marriages are banned , although double first cousin marriages are permitted . this distinction is interesting from abiological perspective because these pairings haveidentical coefficients of inbreeding , f is equal to 0.125. while consanguinity influences the prevalence of recessive genetic conditions , it should not be assumed that this is always the major risk factor within consanguineous communities . in a study of the first 500 people to attend the 1993-1994 premarital thalassaemia screening programme in the kingdom of bahrain , only 15.4 % of carrier-carrier couples were consanguineous ( as compared to a 25.9 % rate of consanguinity in the total study group ) ; therefore trying to discourage consanguineous pairings through premarital counselling would not alone be sufficient to decrease the overall rate of affected births in the community . preference for consanguineous marriage is a feature of the socio-cultural context within which medical genetic services must work . to summarize , consanguinity is a risk factor for hereditary genetic conditions ; however , there are many variables associated with the impact of consanguinity , such as the preference for consanguinity within subpopulations , the degree of consanguinity , and the prevalence of recessive disease alleles in the population . consanguineous marriage should not be discouraged ; instead , voluntary premarital screening to identify carrier couples should be offered to consanguineous communities , in combination with services for prenatal diagnosis and selective abortion of affected fetuses . endogamous marriage : endogamous marriage refers to marriage within a specific group , such as a tribe or clan , as required by custom or law . in india , pakistan and bangladesh , which collectively account for more than 20 % of the worlds population , marriage continues to be arranged within caste and biraderi boundaries that probably date back some 3000 years . there are an estimated 50 , 000 to 60 , 000 separate endogamous communities in india alone.in effect , each of these groupings form separate breeding pools . among muslims in pakistan , endogamous marriage requires matching ethnic and tribal affiliations and at times social stratification based on familial occupation . according to hussain , the strong preference for endogamous and/or consanguineous marriages is driven by multiple factors , including the pride associated with staying within the bounds of biraderi or social group identity , and the ease of arranging marriages within the family . in addition to consanguineous unions , a 1994 study in pakistan showed that a further 38 % of marriages had been contracted within biraderis . patterns of endogamous marriage also result in higher rates of expression of autosomal recessive diseases . the net effect of endogamous marriage is that disease mutations that have arisen recently maybe restricted or even unique to individual ethnic groups , sub-castes , tribes or clans . in general , the less common a disorder , the greater the influence of consanguinity on its prevalence . this applies to both monogenic diseases and multifactorial disorders . for this reason , many genetic diseases have been first diagnosed in highly endogamous communities . in cultures where consanguineous and endogamous marriages are favored , premarital genetic screening can be an effective strategy to increase the reproductive choice of couples and reduce the birth of affected children . this approach is discussed more thoroughly in the section of the report addressing arranged marriages . religion : religious views may have an influence on understanding of , and attitudes towards , the nature of genetic disorders , and their diagnosis and treatment . in particular , they may affect an individuals reproductive decision-making . appreciating the prevailing beliefs in a local community is critical to achieving effective health care . such understanding is necessary to ensure that information is imparted to individuals sensitively and in a way that facilitates understanding . the success of testing and screening programmes rests in part on their acceptance by the religious and wider community . one 1995 study of sickle cell disease in nigeria found that although the majority of carriers and affected individuals surveyed understood how the disorder was passed on , as many as 8 % of carrier fathers and 30 % of carrier mothers believed that the disorder was an act of god . similar studies were conducted in saudi arabia among parents of children with a range of genetic diseases , who were interviewed about their understanding of the cause of the disorder . all parents interviewed believed that god determined their health status , granting either health or illness.at least half understood the inherited basis of genetic diseases ; nevertheless , many of them rejected it , citing instead religious explanations for the cause of disease . as one respondent stated : the disease runs in my family but only god knows why some children are fine and others are not . this did not prevent parents from seeking those treatments permitted by islamic beliefs , demonstrating that religious views about disease causation and secular scientific explanations of heredity are not necessarily mutually exclusive . religious beliefs may affect attitudes to medical genetic services , particularly selective abortion for fetal abnormalities , and , by association , prenatal diagnosis . while many religions do not prohibit termination of pregnancy for medical reasons , provided termination can be performed early on in pregnancy ( 16 ) , in some countries religious beliefs will preclude the abortion of fetuses diagnosed with a genetic disorder ( 221 ; 112 ) . for many couples this will exclude abortion as an option following prenatal diagnosis . where anti-abortion views are prevalent , it is important to provide public education about the range of relevant reproductive choices available ( including premarital screening , partner selection , adoption and the option not to have children ) . these educational activities must be sensitive to gender norms about discussing reproductive choice , particularly the socially acceptable ways in which women are permitted to participate , in order to present information in a manner that maximizes accessibility for , and encourages active participation of , both women and men . in many countries , the timing and rationale for abortions may be determined in accordance with religious teaching . in 1990 the islamic jurisprudence council of the islamic world league issued a fatwa that allowed abortion in the first 120 days following conception : if the fetus was proven beyond doubt to be affected with a severe malformation not amenable to therapy ; if born , there would follow a life of misery for the individual and his/her family ; and if both parents consented . this example demonstrates the potential for religious teaching to accommodate and respond to new scientific developments and research . religious belief plays an important part in many peoples lives , particularly in relation to marriage , reproduction and views on life and death , and can therefore have a significant impact on the way genetic services are implemented within a particular community . dialogue and cooperation between religious leaders , policy-makers and scientists must be encouraged in order to ensure that genetic services are implemented in a manner that is culturally acceptable and maximizes the health benefits to patients and families . termination of affected pregnancy : at present , there are many congenital disorders that are not open to effective management , for example trisomy 18 ( edwards syndrome ) , trisomy 13 ( patau syndrome ) , tay sachs disease and anencephaly . the number of conditions falling into this category is greater in developing countries , where treatment options are further restricted due to limited resources . for example , the condition phenylketonuria requires a highly specialized and expensive diet for approximately the first 16 years of life as well as during the female patients own pregnancies . although this diet is accessible to many of the affected individuals in developed countries , the cost can be prohibitive for affected persons in developing countries . attitudes towards termination of pregnancy are relevant in the context of genetic testing and screening because abortion of fetuses affected by disorders that can not be effectively managed within the local socioeconomic context is one preventive option . this report uses the terms abortion and termination of pregnancy to refer to the deliberate interruption of pregnancy following the detection of fetal abnormality ( unless otherwise noted ) . ( the discussion of unsafe abortion is one such exception . ) unless otherwise specified , reference to abortion as an option for individuals and couples , following prenatal diagnosis , assumes that this procedure is not legally prohibited in the country concerned . contrary to popular belief , a large proportion of developing countries do permit abortions when medically indicated . at present , such services are available in china , cyprus , india , the islamic republic of iran , south africa , some south-east asian countries including cambodia and a minority of latin american and caribbean countries , among others . data on abortion rates ( the number of abortions per 1000 women aged 1544 years ) are not available for all countries ; the known rates for the countries listed above demonstrates the significant differences within countries where abortion is legal : china,26.1 ; cuba , 77.7 ; india , 2.7 ; south africa , 2.7 ; and tunisia , . the specific circumstances under which an abortion is legal vary by country . for example , under ecuadorian regulations , termination of pregnancy is available where the fetus has been diagnosed with a genetic disorder and the termination is approved by both a gynecologist a geneticist . termination for thalassaemia is accepted in saudi arabia and pakistan up to 17 weeks into pregnancy , in line with the islamic fatwa discussed above . in pakistan , prenatal diagnosis in the first trimester and consequent termination of affected pregnancies is widely endorsed : research shows that 89 % of couples who have a fetus affected with thalassaemia chose to terminate the pregnancy . in many developing countries , however , medical abortions remain illegal . for example , termination of pregnancy is prohibited in most countries in latin america and the caribbean , except for cuba , ecuador and isolated jurisdictions such as mexico city . termination under any circumstances is prohibited by law in chile . termination is technically illegal in brazil , except where the pregnancy is the result of rape or will endanger the life of the mother if allowed to continue . according to horovitz et al . , however , brazilian courts have allowed termination where the fetus suffers from severe abnormalities that are incompatible with survival outside the womb . termination is prohibited in jordan unless continuation of the pregnancy dangers the mothers life . full listings of the countries where abortion is legal , and under what circumstances , are available from the united nations population division department of economic and social affairs . the statistics in box 4 demonstrate the breadth of reasons for which a pregnancy might be terminated , and how widely each is legally permitted . thirty-nine percent of countries allow abortion for fetal impairment , although their definitions of what constitutes an impairment will differ . these differing definitions sit within the context of the broader question of how communities define ill health and impairment will differ . case study 2 highlights a complex aspect of this question whether carrier status constitutes impairment . grounds on which abortion is permitted percentage of countries : to save a woman ’ s life 98 % to preserve physical health 63 % to preserve mental health 62 % rape or incest 43 % fetal impairment 39 % economic or social reasons 33 % on request 27 % . case study 2 ethical issues in duchenne muscular dystrophy screening : in india background duchenne muscular dystrophy ( dmd ) is an x-linked muscle disorder , the severe effects of which almost al-ways occur in boys . if the offspring of a carrier female is male , there is 50 % risk he will be affected ; if the off-spring is female there is a 50 % risk she will be a carrier . the incidence of dmd is similar in all countries , and the frequency at birth is about 1 per 3300 male births . therefore , in india with 25 million annual births , almost 3780 boys are born with this disorder every year . a boy with dmd is expected to live into his late teens or early twenties , depending on treatment ; therefore about 75 , 000 boys in india are affected at any one time . affected boys usually walk late , tend to have poor balance and lose the ability to walk at about 10-12 years . this chronic genetic disease results in a significant health burden for affected individuals , families and the state because there is currently no cure , only treatments to improve the individual symptoms , such as a pacemaker for cardiac symptoms , physiotherapy , surgery and medication . the clinical diagnosis of dmd is confirmed by dna testing , which shows deletions in the dystrophin gene in almost 65 % of cases . the dna diagnostic test is expensive ( about us $ 75 in india ) and parents must pay for the test themselves . however , if the test is conducted by a government-funded institution the service is state-subsidized ( i.e . parents pay approximately half of the $ 75 cost ) . determination of the sex of the fetus is a necessary component of prenatal testing for x-linked diseases . prenatal diagnosis of the disorder is now possible , and the service is available in five institutions in india . pre-natal diagnosis of dmd costs about us $ 300 , a price that is significantly cheaper than in developed countries , but is still expensive for many families in india . case description : a couple with a son affected by dmd and a non-carrier daughter requested prenatal diagnosis for a subsequent pregnancy . the mothers brother was also affected with dmd and died at the age of 20 years . this indicated that unsafe abortion prenatal diagnosis provides information for prospective parents about the health of their fetus . it is common for parents to decide to terminate a pregnancy if prenatal diagnosis reveals a fetal abnormality . access to safe abortion services allows parents to safely terminate an affected pregnancy if they wish . however , many women around the world do not have access to safe abortion . unsafe abortions are defined as abortions carried out either by persons lacking the necessary skills or in an environment that does not conform to minimal medical standards , or both . access to safe abortion for affected fetuses is an important part of comprehensive genetic services . prenatal diagnosis and detection of a fetal abnormality , in the absence of safe abortion services , may mean that some women resort to unsafe abortions , thereby placing them at increased risk of death or serious complications . horovitz et al . comment that in brazil the mother was an obligate carrier of the mutant gene ( i.e . she was a definite carrier , as contrasted with a case occurring in the absence of a family history of dmd , where the mother is considered to be a probable carrier ) . a prenatal diagnosis was conducted and the fetus was diagnosed as a female carrier of dmd . the information regarding sex of the fetus is available to the laboratory but this was not disclosed to the couple . they were informed that the fetus was normal and did not have dmd . the information conveyed to them could mean one of three things : that the fetus was an unaffected male , anon-carrier female or a carrier female . the couple was not satisfied with this information and insisted that they be told the sex of the fetus . they said that they would be happy to continue the pregnancy if the fetus was a normal male , or a normal female , but would like to terminate the pregnancy if the fetus was a female carrier of the dmd mutation . the parents argued that a carrier female would face difficulty in finding a husband and would subsequently require invasive , inconvenient , and costly tests during pregnancy . the laboratory refused to disclose the information requested by the couple be-cause indian law is clear that the sex of the fetus should not be disclosed , except in cases where the information relates to the diagnosis of a genetic disease . ethical , legal and social issues : x-linked genetic diseases pose significant ethical issues in developing countries . in arranged marriages , family medical histories are often discussed , and the potential brides parents can be faced with a difficult decision about whether to reveal to the potential husbands family that their daughter may be a carrier of a serious genetic disorder . the couple discussed above was counselled on two occasions once when the affected child was brought for diagnosis and therapy , and again when the mother was pregnant . there are about 15 genetic counselling centres in india , a number totally insufficient for the demand generated by such a large population . where there are no genetic counselling centres available , the treating specialists ( pediatricians and neurologists etc . ) provide genetic counselling . in the absence of public health insurance , the indian population has to bear the personal anguish and the significant socioeconomic burden associated with the birth of a child with a genetic disease . in cases like the one discussed above laboratories differ in their policies regarding disclosure of sex of the fetus , and whether to reveal that a female fetus is a carrier . families also differ in how they react to this information some continue the pregnancy with carrier females and some do not . those who can afford to pay for a safe abortion usually choose to terminate the affected pregnancy with no health or legal consequences . on the other hand , for most couples the option is between continuation of an affected pregnancy against their will , or an illegal and un-safe abortion , with its risks of social ostracism , prison , health damage , and even death . unsafe abortion is a serious and neglected health care problem in developing countries that severely affects women and , more specifically , women health . unsafe abortions are responsible for 17 % of the maternal mortality in latin america , resulting in a rate of 30 unsafe abortion deaths per10 000 live births . africa has even higher rates:100 unsafe abortion deaths per 10 , 000 live births ( and in east africa this figure rises to 140 unsafe abortion deaths per 10 000 live births ) . this should be a grave concern for developing countries with limited health budgets . for example , a review of the literature found that it is not uncommon for half of all obstetric admissions to be for complications related to unsafe abortions . legal prohibition of abortion does not prevent them from taking place ( note that not all illegal abortions are unsafe ; and conversely not all legal abortions are safe ) . in fact , restrictive legislation is positively associated with a high incidence of unsafe abortion . for example , an estimated 4.5 million terminations are undertaken every year in latin america , 95 % of which are illegal and most of which occur in unsafe conditions , especially those obtained by poorer women . romania significantly restricted abortion laws in 1966 and witnessed a rise in the number of abortion-related deaths , from 20 per 100 , 000 live births in 1965 to 150 in 1983. when abortion was legalized in 1989 , maternal deaths caused by abortion dropped to 60 per 100 , 000. this case demonstrates a clear correlation between restrictive abortion legislation and abortion-related death . the vast majority of unsafe abortions are not related to genetic disorders . women and couples can , however , be put under emotional and psychological strain and serious physical risk in societies where prenatal diagnosis of congenital disorders is available , but abortion of affected fetuses is not . personal views on abortion vary and couples will therefore differ in their response to the knowledge that the fetus has a congenital disorder , but it must be acknowledged that a proportion of such couples will wish to abort affected fetuses for medical reasons . as discussed in section , research in pakistan indicated that 89 % of couples who had a fetus affected with thalassaemia chose to terminate the pregnancy . the role of abortion within medical genetic services : despite the relationship between prenatal diagnosis of congenital anomalies and abortion , genetic services can offer a range of health benefits that are independent of abortion . for some pregnant women and couples , prenatal diagnosis and genetic counselling can provide a valuable service in the absence of legal and safe abortion services , as they can help families , particularly mothers , prepare for the birth of an affected child . however it should be acknowledged that this benefit is only realized if women actually have access to prenatal services and are able to attend counselling . culture , religion and social factors influence not only the views and practices surrounding pregnancy and termination , but also affect a woman ’ s ability to access these services . lack of social mobility , lack of access to household resources in order to pay for services and social norms of permission-seeking behaviour , can limit women ’ s access to genetics and prenatal services . premarital family planning and preconception genetic counselling are other ways of preventing genetic diseases independent of abortion . potential carrier-carrier couples have the option of finding other partners to significantly reduce the risk of their child being affected by a genetic disease ; alternatively couples can choose not to have children , or in some cases to adopt . a small number of couples in developing countries may have access to , and the funds to pay for , in vitro fertilization ( ivf ) , and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis . none of these options involves the termination of affected pregnancies . in light of the divergent , often strongly felt , views about the moral acceptability of abortion , it is important to foster dialogue between patients and families affected by genetic diseases , geneticists , physicians , public health officials , government , religious leaders and other relevant interest groups . public engagement should take account of the socio-cultural taboos surrounding reproduction and abortion , and the division of social space in which men and women can discuss these issues , to ensure that the views of both men and women are included in the decision-making process . a comprehensive nationally coordinated set of genetic services must consider the relationship between prenatal genetic testing , the legality of abortion and the risks to women as a result of unsafe abortion practices . who consultants have stated that : optimum reproductive counselling can take place only in the context of avail-able and affordable contraception and abortion for congenital disorders , and available and affordable resources for caring for persons with disabilities . the dialogue carried out between religious scholars , public policy officials and geneticists in the islamic republic of iran in relation to abortion demonstrates the potential for constructive debate . in the islamic republic of iran , religious scholars have determined a threshold for termination of fetuses with thalassaemia under 15 weeks , in accordance with religious opinion that a baby becomes ensouled at 120 days . country example 4 community engagement in thalassaemia screening in the islamic republic of iran the thalassaemia screening programme in the islamic republic of iran is widely acknowledged as one of the best examples of genetic screening in a developing country . there are an estimated 25 , 000 thalassaemia patients in the islamic republic of iran , accounting for about 0.04 % of the population ; and an estimated 45 % of the population are carriers . this results in about 8,000 at-risk pregnancies per year , approximately one quarter of which are affected by thalassaemia . the programme was initiated in 1996 and within five years . 2.7 million couples had undergone premarital screening . the 10 , 000 couples who were both found tobe carriers were offered genetic counselling . a summary of the programme from 1997 to 2001 showed that on average 53 % of carrier couples still chose to marry despite the genetic reproductive risk . at-risk couples wanted access to prenatal diagnosis and the option of selective termination of affected fetuses . this in-creased demand for termination services sparked de-bate among the public , religious leaders and policy-makers . in 2001 , the law was amended to allow selective termination of fetuses at less than 15 weeks gestation for thalassaemia . it is anticipated that the option of selective termination will subsequently be extended toother serious congenital disorders . governments must take action to address unsafe abortion , which is a serious threat to women and women ’ s health . in countries where abortion for fetal abnormalities is restricted or illegal . sex selection and sex ratios the term sex selection can cover a wide variety of practices , including selecting embryos for implantation in ivf , sperm sorting and selective abortion , and may be carried out for different purposes . sex selection for medical reasons involves selection to avoid producing a child affected by a sex-linked genetic disease . family balancing refers to the selection of a child of a particular sex to achieve a mix of male and female children within a family , in other words for social reasons . many countries , such as australia , germany , the netherlands , the united kingdom , and the united states , are currently considering the ethical and social validity of sex selection for the purposes of family balancing . in some countries , there is no clear preference for choosing a particular sex . for example , one study conducted in germany questioned 1084 men and women aged 1845 about their gender preferences and whether they would use sperm sorting to select for their child ’ s sex . more than half those surveyed had no preference about the sex of their child , with 30 % expressing a desire for a family with an equal number of male and female children . only 4 % would prefer more boys than girls , and 3 % more girls than boys . a slight preference for boys as the firstborn child was also expressed , with 14.2 % wishing for a firstborn son , as against 10.1 % wanting their firstborn to be female . a mere 6 % , however , said they would use sperm sorting to choose the sex of their children . however , sex selection can also be used to create imbalance in the sex ratio in a family , typically in favour of sons . in the context of developing countries , sex selection almost exclusively involves the abortion of female fetuses . unless otherwise specified , we use the term sex selection in this report to refer to the abortion of female fetuses for non-medical reasons . debate is required at the academic and policy level regarding the ethical acceptability of introducing prenatal genetic testing in the absence of safe abortion services for medical purposes . evidence demonstrates that a significant proportion of couples will choose to abort fetuses affected by a serious genetic condition . in the absence of safe abortion services , some women will resort to unsafe abortion , thereby exposing themselves to the associated medical , financial , social and legal risks . the success of the iranian screening programme resulted from the holistic way in which the services were developed . the programme was supported by widespread public education and public health surveillance . the programme proved to be sensitive to the needs of the affected population , capable of engaging diverse sections of the community in debate and of reaching a consensus viewpoint by integrating the views of religious scholars and affected families , thus establishing a workable solution to the issue of termination of affected pregnancies . gender there are a range of gender-related issues associated with the implementation of genetic testing services in developing countries . a consistent concern is the potential for stigmatization of , and discrimination against , vulnerable sections of the community . in communities where the social system does not treat men and women equally and where strict gender roles exist , the scope for discrimination against , and ill treatment of , women is greater . in cultures where marriages are traditionally arranged , there is potential for discrimination against women who are found to be carriers of genetic diseases . a further implication for not only women , but also society in general , is the practice of sex-selective abortion in communities where social and cultural structures strongly favour the birth of male children . the appropriation of medical genetic services , introduced to help patients and families affected by a genetic condition , for the purposes of non-medical sex selection is a serious concern . the following sophisticated genetic diagnostic services are not required to identify the sex of a fetus . ultrasound machine , which are relatively inexpensive and easy to use , have been used worldwide to determine fetal sex for a number of decades , with the invasive procedures of cvs and amniocentesis also employed . in high resource settings , this technology is being supplemented with sperm sorting services and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis ; however , these services are not readily available in developing countries . sex selection and bias against female children approximately 51.3 % of live births are male , giving a live sex ratio of 1.06. the national rates reported throughout europe indicate the consistency of this ratio : austria 51.39 % , belgium 51.27 % , denmark 51.38 % , england and wales 51.26 % , france 51.18 % , germany 51.47 % , italy 51.35 % , netherlands 51.38 % , spain 51.44 % . by contrast , the sex ratios in many developing countries are changing significantly . according to chinas fifth national census in 2000 , the live birth sex ratio had reached approximately 1.17 , meaning that 53.92 % of all births were male . in some regions of china , the ratio was as high as 1.43 or 58.85 % . one explanation for this shift in sex ratios is that the social bias in favour of male children in certain cultures provides an incentive for parents to select the sex of their child or children . sex-selective termination has become common in many countries particularly in china ( including taiwan province ) and the republic of korea , and also in singapore , india and other south asian states . this section examines examples of two of these countries india and china and their efforts to curb the practice of sex-selective abortion of female fetuses . sex-selective abortions in india abortion was legalized in india in 1971 with the introduction of the medical termination of pregnancy act , for cases where the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant women or a grave injury to her physical or mental health or where there is substantial risk that if the child were born , it would suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped . abortions are permitted up to the 20th week of gestation ; however , many illegal abortions are performed by both qualified and unqualified people beyond this limit , and for reasons other than those endorsed in the act . pressure to have male children as a result of son preference , which in combination with the availability of serv-ices for fetal sex determination and abortion , and decreasing fertility , results in some couples seeking pre-natal diagnosis for sex selection and then choosing to abort female fetuses . due to the illegality of the practice , it is impossible to establish the rates of sex-selective abortions in india . to take an individual example , a study was conducted in punjab between 1990 and 1991 on 596 children . fifty four of these children had had their sex identified by ultra-sound before they were born ; 49 of these children , 54 were boys . each of the 5 girls born after their sex had been identified prenatally had either been wrongly identified as a male or had a male twin . the striking feature of this study , despite the small sample size , is the fact that the data implies that none of the pregnancies thought to involve only a female fetus were carried to term . as a result , the sex ratio of the children born is vastly distorted in relation to the natural sex ratio . the study also found a positive correlation between the use of sex selection and mothers ' education and an increase in mothers ' income . it is not clear whether higher education and wealth result in an increased desire to select the sex of the child , or an increase in access to sex selection services , or both . to curb this practice , the indian government introduced the prenatal diagnostic techniques ( regulation and prevention of misuse ) act in 1994. the act limits the use of prenatal diagnosis to the detection of listed diseases and prohibits the use of prenatal diagnosis to determine the sex of a fetus . it also makes it illegal for any person conducting prenatal diagnostic procedures to communicate the sex of the fetus by words , signs , or in any other manner . all genetic counseling centers , genetic laboratories , and genetic clinics are banned from performing prenatal diagnosis to determine the sex of a fetus . genetic counseling centers , genetic laboratories , and genetic clinics must prominently display a notice that disclosure of the sex of a fetus is prohibited by law . in 2002 , the act was amended to include further prohibitions on sex selection . the amendments made it an offense to conduct or aid in conducting sex selection on a woman or a man or on both or on any tissue , embryo , conceptus , fluid , or gametes derived from either or both of them . selling any equipment that could be used to detect the sex of a fetus to a clinic , laboratory , or person not registered under the act was prohibited . finally , all persons were banned from seeking or encouraging the conduct of any sex selection technique and from causing or allowing to be caused the selection of sex before or after conception . however , according to mudur , the act is not enforced , and critics have accused the medical profession in india of showing gross indifference to this issue through their inaction . in 1999 , the indian medical association and the medical council of india instructed doctors to stop performing ultrasounds and terminations for the purpose of sex selection . the indian medical association has stated that it will launch independent investigations of suspected doctors and has threatened to revoke the licenses of doctors found guilty . sex selection and human rights : sex selection is widely condemned in the literature . in its review of ethical issues in medical genetics , who consultants argued that sex selection is oppressive . governments in china and india , where sex selection is widespread , have introduced legislation banning the practice . academics in countries where sex selection is not prevalent and in countries where it is have condemned the practice . the united nations convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women ( cedaw ) requires states parties to take all appropriate measures to modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men and women , with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and customary and all other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or the superiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and women . the cedaw committee has specifically addressed the issue of sex-selective abortion . in 1999 , the committee called on the government of china to take all appropriate measures to modify and eliminate son preference by expanding educational and employment opportunities for women in rural areas . it also called for the government to enforce laws against sex-selective practices . in 2000 , the committee commended the government of india for introducing legislation that has banned sex-selective abortions but also called upon the government to elicit the support of medical associations in enforcing professional ethics and preventing sex-selective abortions . however , there is a human rights argument in favor of tolerance of prenatal and pre-implantation sex diagnosis . this argument holds that individual women , who may already be oppressed by family and social structures they are powerless to change , should not be burdened by the continuation or initiation of pregnancies they do not want , in this case , female pregnancies . women are not the sole perpetrators of son preference or the devaluation of women in general and therefore should not be compelled to continue unwanted pregnancies that may further increase the burden on women . who stated in the 2005 world health report : in societies where giving birth to sons defines women 's status and rights as wives , daughters-in-law , and mothers , sex determination and sex-selective abortion allow women to gain control over at least one aspect of their lives . as indicated by the cedaw statement to the government of the people 's republic of china , the solution to sex-selective abortion is likely to lie in social measures that reduce son preference through the promotion of the status of women , such as increasing educational and employment opportunities for girls and women . country example examines some of the reasons for sex selection in china and the country 's attempts to curb this practice . country example : sex-selective abortions in china . in 1999 , the live birth sex ratio in china was 117 males for 100 females or 53.92 % , a significant increase from the 1980 pre-policy rate of 51.69 % . the 2000 national census counted approximately 12.8 million fewer females born between 1980 and 2000 than would be expected based on normal sex ratios . there is a strong cultural preference for sons in china , and son preference is viewed as the fundamental factor influencing the sex ratios . there are three potential explanations for the high ratio : ( a ) parents are underreporting female births and female children to official authorities ; ( b ) female fetuses are selectively aborted ; ( c ) female babies are the victims of infanticide . hypothesis ( a ) challenges the accuracy of the official sex ratio , while explanations ( b ) and ( c ) accept the ratio . zeng et al . argue that data from a range of national and local sources demonstrate that underreporting and sex-selective abortion of female fetuses can explain almost the entire increase in the reported sex ratio , essentially ruling out infanticide and infant abandonment as a main contributing factor . in 1979 , china introduced a one-child policy in an effort to curb its exponential population growth . although the policy is widely referred to as the one-child policy , its implementation has not been uniform and varies significantly between provinces . important exceptions to the one-child rule include the following justifications for a second child : ( a ) the first child is a girl ; ( b ) the first child is disabled ; ( c ) both parents are themselves only children ; and ( d ) the parents have certain occupations . exceptions are more common in rural areas . an estimated 25 % of all communities allow all couples to have two children , and another 30 % of communities allow couples with a girl to have a second child . for the purpose of this report , we are specifically interested in the magnitude of sex-selective female abortions and the role of genetic testing and screening services . the availability of sex-determination technology , based on cvs , amniocentesis , and ultrasound , is viewed by some as a major factor in the increased chinese sex ratio . evidence in favor of the influence of sex-selective technology on the increasing sex ratio is medical genetics services in developing countries , as the shandong province had already passed local prohibitions on such abortions . however , these legal measures are hard to enforce and seem to have had little effect . to redress the problem , china 's political leadership has set the goal of reversing the rising sex ratio over the next few years : `` with the strengthening of the responsibility system , with the joint evaluation of indicators of population quantity and population sex ratios , we aim in three years to bring the trend of rising sex ratios under control . `` the driving motivational force behind sex selection in china is son preference , especially in rural areas . research indicates that an increase in mothers ' education decreases the sex ratio , presumably by reducing son preference . this helps to explain why both shanghai and beijing , with relatively high average levels of education among mothers , have not experienced rising sex ratios despite decreasing fertility . mothers ' education is also associated with higher levels of development and higher family income . gu and roy observed in 1995 that provinces in china with normal sex ratios were those with : ( a ) the highest level of development ( and lower fertility ) , or ( b ) the lowest levels of development ( with high fertility ) . high fertility results in larger families and therefore a higher likelihood that families will naturally include a son . in order to reverse the sex ratios while maintaining small families , son preference must be addressed . it therefore seems that increasing mothers ' education is a promising strategy for reversing an imbalanced sex ratio . conclusion : clearly , sex-selective abortion often occurs due to considerable social pressures , and simple legal prohibitions on such abortions are likely to fail if these social pressures remain strong . thus , it seems likely that adjusting social incentives will be a more effective strategy in combating the practice of sex selection than legislative prohibitions alone . given the apparent high correlation between mothers ' education and the prevalence of normal sex ratios , prioritizing girls ' and women 's education seems to be a promising strategy . the fact that although the one-child policy was implemented in 1979 , sex ratios did not start to rise until about five years later , shortly after sex-selective technology became more widely available . coale and banister argue that the commonality of decreasing fertility and availability of technology for prenatal sex determination are features in both china and the republic of korea , and that these factors explain the rising sex ratios : `` sex-selective abortion also has emerged in korea , which enjoys many forms of advanced technology and where the demand for sex identification is very high because the preference for males is much like that in china . no coercive one-child policy exists in korea , but through voluntary use of contraception and abortion , the total fertility rate in korea has fallen to about 1.5 births per woman . in both the people 's republic of china and south korea ( republic of korea ) , couples strongly desire more sons than daughters , on average . as prenatal sex determination has become available , parents in both countries have evidently used it . `` the one-child policy , and in particular the monetary penalty for exceeding the designated limits , is widely believed to be a contributing factor in the rising sex ratio ; however , it is difficult to disassociate this influence from the other factors discussed above . for example , shanghai and beijing , where the one-child policy has been most effective , have relatively normal sex ratios . irrespective of the specific causes of sex-selective abortion , it must be acknowledged that the practice reflects morally unacceptable social discrimination against females . anti-female sex selection contravenes the principle of gender equality ; female infanticide and abandonment are a serious violation of the fundamental human rights of women and children . the chinese government has tried a number of methods to reverse the sex ratio . in 1994 , china prohibited the use of ultrasounds or other technical means to detect the sex of an unborn fetus , except where necessary on medical grounds . as of 2003 , sex-selective abortions were also prohibited , although some provinces such ... country example on this issue , the united nations population fund has stated that : overall , the value of girl children to both their family and society must be expanded beyond their definition as potential child-bearers and caretakers and reinforced through the adoption and implementation of educational and social policies that encourage their full participation in the development of the societies in which they live . leaders at all levels of the society must speak out and act forcefully against patterns of gender discrimination within the family , based on preference for sons . one of the aims should be to eliminate excess mortality of girls , wherever such a pattern exists . special education and public information efforts are needed to promote equal treatment of girls and boys with respect to nutrition , health care , education and social , economic and political activity , as well as equitable inheritance rights . governments are urged to take the necessary measures to prevent infanticide , prenatal sex selection . one example of a country that has successfully reversed the rise in sex ratios is the republic of korea . in the mid-1990s , sex ratios at birth for the third and fourth child had increased dramatically , peaking at their highest level above 200 ( reaching as high as 240 for the fourth child in 1993 ) . the live birth sex ratio for third and fourth children decreased to approximately 150 in 2003 as a result of the following government initiatives : legal and policy measures : these included legal prohibitions on sex determination and strong policy measures to prevent sex-selective abortion , implemented through medical guidelines , norms , and codes . these have been enforced since 1992 ; doctors found guilty of conducting sex-selective abortions are de-licensed . mass media campaigns : media campaigns were initiated in 1991 encouraging couples to change their attitudes to sex-selective abortion . social policies : the initiatives included a range of policies to bring about changes in gender norms , values , and attitudes in addition to specific policies to improve the status of women by increasing education and employment opportunities . discrimination and stigmatization : the issues central to debates concerning hiv testing , such as discrimination , psychological trauma , and stigmatization , reverberate in discussion surrounding genetic testing . as has been seen with the hiv/aids epidemic , the combination of lack of treatment , low levels of public education about the disease , and fear of stigmatization can create informal barriers to people seeking testing . for the 40 million people living with hiv/aids , particularly those in developing countries , stigmatization and discrimination discourage many individuals from seeking treatment for , and information about , the disease . as the united nations educational , scientific and cultural organization ( unesco ) has stated , many are even afraid to take the aids test because of the shame associated with the pandemic . this same pattern of stigmatization and fear has been observed in response to some genetic testing and screening programs . the informal barriers arising as a result of systemic stigmatization and discrimination of those affected by genetic conditions breach the principle of distributive justice because while services may be available within a community , some people have their access to those services unjustifiably and unfairly restricted . the potential for discrimination and stigmatization as a result of genetic testing has been a primary focus of debates regarding ethics , regulation , and legislation in developed countries . however , in these countries , the focus has generally been on discrimination in relation to insurance or employment . while these are also relevant concerns in many developing countries , there is the additional concern of discrimination in relation to marriage , and this is a burden that is expected to fall disproportionately on women . arranged marriage : arranged marriages and arranged introductions are common in communities throughout india , pakistan , sri lanka , the middle east , and parts of africa , as well as in certain communities living in other regions , such as the orthodox jewish community . many cultures that favor arranged marriages also favor consanguineous and endogamous marriages . the formal process of arranging marriages or introductions can provide a window for genetic screening services to be offered to the population in question . premarital screening can provide individuals and couples with greater reproductive choice . if genetic screening is conducted prior to partner selection , available reproductive choices include ( a ) the decision to change reproductive partner ; ( b ) the decision not to have children or to adopt ; ( c ) the decision to request pre-implantation diagnosis or prenatal diagnosis ; or ( d ) if prenatal diagnosis identifies an affected fetus , the parents can choose to prepare for the management of the disorder or to terminate the affected pregnancy . throughout the report , we argue that sensitivity to the local socio-cultural context can improve the efficiency of genetic testing and screening programs . however , it is important to point out that the process of non-voluntary arranged marriage contravenes the human rights principle of free and full consent in marriage . the universal declaration of human rights states that marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses . although the report discusses strategies for minimizing discrimination as a result of genetic testing and screening programs in communities where arranged marriages are popular , we recognize that non-voluntary arranged marriage breaches human rights and do not endorse this practice . however , it should also be noted that many arranged marriages are voluntarily entered into . empirical evidence suggests that premarital screening and discovery of mutual carrier status for a particular disorder often does not lead couples to separate and choose other partners . for example , in the islamic republic of iran , where many marriages are arranged , more than 50 % of couples who discover they are at risk of passing on a recessive genetic disease to their children still marry and then utilize prenatal diagnostic services . arranged marriages and the stigmatization of female carriers of genetic diseases while premarital screening can increase reproductive choice , it can also lead to physiological and emotional stress and strain within the relationship , in addition to social discrimination and stigmatization . these negative repercussions need to be acknowledged and minimized . where marriages are arranged , families may be less inclined to match their children with a person who is known to be a carrier for a genetic disease . in some communities , this may lead to stigmatization of carrier individuals . in societies where women are not treated as equal to men , the burden of stigmatization and discrimination due to carrier status for genetic diseases can disproportionately affect women . one effect of this discrimination is that in communities favoring arranged marriage or introductions , women identified as carriers of a genetic disorder may be unable to find a husband . in research concerning the screening of extended families for hemoglobin diseases in pakistan , a country where arranged marriages are common , ahmed et al . found that the parents of women found to be carriers preferred to postpone testing of the partner until after marriage and then to use prenatal diagnosis . this option is obviously more suited to medical genetics services in developing countries communities , such as pakistan , that permit abortion of affected fetuses . concerns regarding the eligibility of female carriers can also arise in developed countries . some conservative subsections of the ashkenazi jewish communities continue to favor arranged introductions . in addition , this community experiences a high prevalence of a number of recessive genetic diseases . therefore , fears have been expressed that carrier screening could lead to the discrimination of female carriers by creating a class of unmarriageable women . the potential for discrimination against carriers , particularly women , is a significant threat to the equitable and fair integration of genetic carrier screening in developing , as well as developed , countries . responses : there are a number of responses to this potential form of discrimination . the dor yeshorim genetic screening model described below ( community example ) offers an example of a response to this concern in developed countries . the student screening program for genetic blood diseases in the kingdom of bahrain presents a different approach based on community education . a range of specific genetic diseases occur at higher prevalence in the ashkenazi jewish population . one example is tay-sachs disease , a degenerative neurological disorder that follows an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern . one in 25 ashkenazi jews are carriers for the disease , and screening for the mutation is well established . the strict orthodox jewish community has specific social and cultural requirements for a successful genetic screening program because they do not endorse prenatal diagnosis or abortion . in this community , marriage often arises as a result of an arranged introduction undertaken by parents , with the support of a professional matchmaker . in response to demand for carrier screening , a private international organization called dor yeshorim was established in the united states in the late 1980s to provide pre-introduction screening of teenagers for tay-sachs disease . the service now includes carrier testing for up to 10 genetic diseases . in the united kingdom in 2004 , the set of tests cost 150. one major concern raised in relation to the screening program was the potential stigma that detected carriers , particularly women , could suffer and how this might affect their chances of being introduced to potential partners . the pro-community example dor yeshorim as a response to the specific cultural needs of the ashkenazi jewish population developed an innovative solution to minimize stigmatization and discrimination of identified carriers : test results remain confidential , even to the individual and their family . each blood sample is given a code number , and the results are stored in an international database only under the code , which is given to individuals and their parents . prior to an introduction , the codes of both potential partners will be given to the professional matchmakers who will submit them to dor yeshorim for analysis . the matchmaker , and subsequently the families , will receive one of two responses : compatible or incompatible . if the result is incompatible , the introduction will not occur , but neither family will know for which of the 10 diseases their child is a carrier . the dor yeshorim service has successfully reduced the birth of children affected with the recessive genetic disorders it screens for and provides an innovative example of the way in which genetic services can be adapted to the cultural and social requirements of different communities . there are , however , valid concerns with this approach . keeping the test results confidential does not tackle and may , in fact , perpetuate , the underlying stigma associated with genetic disease . furthermore , the strict rules regarding confidentiality run contrary to the principle of autonomy because patients are not allowed access to the results even if they request them . in the absence of viable alternatives except to undergo testing for each disorder independently , which can often be restrictively expensive and time-consuming , the confidentiality clause can seriously impede individuals ' autonomy . this limitation can be very frustrating for individuals who wish to know their carrier status . some have argued for the availability of publicly funded alternatives to the dor yeshorim model to increase choice among the ashkenazi jewish population . by contrast , the student screening program for genetic blood diseases in the kingdom of bahrain represents a different response to the potential discrimination of carriers in marriage . it relies on a system of comprehensive community education to address stigmatization and discrimination , rather than strict confidentiality of test results . this approach has been very important in addressing the initial public resistance to the screening program because of concerns that girls found to be carriers would not be able to find husbands . the program includes an education campaign targeted at teachers , parents , and children , which emphasizes that ( a ) all people carry some defective genes ; ( b ) if a carrier married a non-carrier , they would be able to avoid the heightened risk of giving birth to an affected child ; ( c ) that although carriers were advised to marry non-carriers instead , they were not prevented from marrying other carriers . by relying on a comprehensive education program to reduce stigma and discrimination of carriers , public understanding about genetic disease , how it is passed on , and how it can be treated or prevented is likely to increase . some research suggests that the potential for discrimination may be lower in communities that favor consanguineous marriage , such as the kingdom of bahrain , because of the highly cohesive and mutually supportive nature of family and community structures . a study of south indian families at risk of familial adenomatous polyposis concluded that this tight-knit , supportive social structure might result in less stigmatization of affected and carrier individuals . regulation : anti-discrimination regulations in countries are founded on the principles of fundamental human rights , which are enshrined in regional and international instruments . countries that have ratified international human rights treaties have taken on an obligation to give effect to the rights contained within these documents through their national legal systems . several international human rights documents address the issue of genetic discrimination . the unesco 2003 international declaration of human genetic data asserts that every effort should be made to ensure human genetic data are not used for purposes intending or having the effect of infringing upon human rights , fundamental freedoms , or the human dignity of an individual . the council of europe also addresses genetic information in the convention on human rights and biomedicine ; however , it uses the more general wording any form of discrimination against a person on grounds of his or her genetic heritage is prohibited . a number of developing countries have introduced legislative measures to discourage or prohibit discrimination and stigmatization , some of which focus on discrimination specifically related to medical conditions or genetic disease . in georgia , for example , discrimination on the grounds of genetic heritage is prohibited . medical genetics services in developing countries : other countries have enacted more general prohibitions of discrimination on the grounds of health status . under the law of peru , individuals have the right not to be discriminated against for suffering a disease or disorder . the fijian constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability , which could include genetic disease . similarly , the constitution of ghana guarantees freedom from discrimination . privacy and confidentiality : as noted in the previous section , there are genuine concerns that people who are affected by a genetic disease or are disease carriers may suffer stigmatization and discrimination . as an example , the previous section discussed the potential for discrimination against women in countries that favor arranged marriage , and the stigmatization suffered by thalassemia patients in sri lanka is discussed in case study 3. privacy and confidentiality standards are a vital tool for protecting individuals from possible discrimination and stigmatization on the basis of a genetic disorder . both the right to privacy and the right to confidentiality can be derived from the principle of autonomy . autonomy , broadly understood , is the capacity for self-determination : based on the idea of a region of sovereignty for the self and the right to protect it by restricting access . protecting privacy is one aspect of protecting the realm of personal space . privacy , fully conceived , can include all things that fall within this personal space — bodily integrity , mental space , personal relationships , and personal information . privacy is often defined more narrowly as relating exclusively to information about a person . for the purposes of the following discussion , we are interested in this narrower definition , though in the context of genetic testing , privacy and confidentiality rights can extend to the right not to disclose information to third parties and the right not to undergo testing . privacy and confidentiality are two related , overlapping , but distinct concepts . the difference is : an infringement of x 's right to confidentiality occurs only if the person to whom x disclosed the information in confidence fails to protect the information or deliberately discloses it to someone without x 's consent . by contrast , a person who , without authorization , enters a hospital record room or computer databank violates rights of privacy rather than rights of confidentiality . privacy and confidentiality may be particularly important in countries where genetic diseases are not well understood and where widespread knowledge of an individual 's genetic status ( such as the fact that a woman is a carrier for a disorder ) may affect them socially . the limit of an individual 's right to confidentiality of genetic test results is a question that generates controversy . in australia , canada , new zealand , the united kingdom , the united states , and many european countries , confidentiality is currently considered to be paramount , and full consent must be received before any information is disclosed to third parties . however , because genetic information may affect an entire family , rather than only the individual , the information revealed by genetic testing may be relevant to the health of people beyond the patient themselves . in many cultures , especially in highly endogamous or consanguineous communities , and where arranged marriage is the norm , a genetic disease may influence not only the marriage prospects of the affected individual but potentially all members of the extended family . under such circumstances , it may be necessary to balance respect for patient confidentiality against the needs and considerations of other family members for whom information about genetic risk could influence decision-making about their health or reproduction . achieving this balance is a challenging task and is rightly the responsibility of medical genetics services in developing countries , which has passed laws to protect citizens ' health care rights and to ensure the inviolability of citizens ' dignity and privacy . other countries , for instance peru , and argentina , have passed more generic privacy and confidentiality laws that do not focus on genetic information specifically but which may cover it . as an example , peruvian law states that all users of health services shall have the right to respect for his or her person , dignity and privacy and to demand confidentiality of his or her medical information . turkish law holds that the patient may request that data concerning his state of health are not communicated to himself , to his family , or his associates and that respect for a patient 's privacy is a fundamental principle . the law further states that every medical procedure shall be carried out in such a way that the patient 's privacy is respected . the implementation of the privacy legislation and regulations discussed above is commendable ; however , it should be acknowledged that there is the potential for discrepancies between law , policy , and practice . enforcement can often depend on a number of factors relating to the status of the individual whose rights have been breached , including socioeconomic , ethnic , or other status . in settings where female carriers are stigmatized and where there are social repercussions for the reputation of the family , any further publicity of test results is likely to serve as a significant disincentive to people bringing cases to court or even reporting a breach of confidentiality or privacy . women may be especially disadvantaged in this respect as they may be unable to access mechanisms for remedying discrimination on the basis of gender . for example , in some countries , women may lack legal standing to bring complaints or face bias within the legal system . they may also be unable to access mechanisms to report and remedy discrimination due to restrictions on their access to public spaces or illiteracy . national governments , who should consider the risk of discrimination to the patient and the potential harm to other family members within that local context . regulation international human rights documents state that individuals should be protected from unauthorized disclosure of genetic information and assert a patient 's right to be informed of genetic test results . also addressed are issues of authorized disclosure and unauthorized disclosure to third parties for public interest reasons . legislative measures in this area seek to ensure that medical practitioners and people with access to sensitive medical and genetic information are prevented from disseminating that information to other family members or more widely . legislation may also provide sanctions to encourage compliance . one example of a developing country that has introduced such protection is georgia , patient rights in georgia since 2000 , georgian citizens have enjoyed the right to information about proposed procedures , the results of medical examinations , alternative treatments , diagnosis and prognosis and the right to determine with whom this information may be shared . health care providers are also required to maintain a patient 's confidentiality . in georgia , informed consent is required for the lawful provision of a medical service , which would most likely include a genetic test . genetic testing to identify a genetic disorder or predisposition to a disorder maybe carried out only for the purposes of the patient 's healthcare or for health-related scientific research . together , these two provisions work to ensure that only necessary , voluntary genetic testing will occur . medical genetic services in developing countries . facilitating patient decision-making the who genomics and world health report states that the importance of developing genetic services worldwide , including public education and genetic counseling , can not be overemphasized . the report warns against introducing medical genetic services in the absence of public education and without the support of genetic counselors . in 1993 , a who scientific group endorsed the following principles of genetic counseling : ( a ) the autonomy of the individual or couple , ( b ) their right to full information , and ( c ) strict confidentiality of genetic test results . autonomy individual autonomy refers to the capacity to be one 's own person ; to live one 's life according to reasons and motives that are one 's own and not the product of manipulative or distorting external forces . autonomy is also described as a second-order capacity of persons to reflect critically on their first order preferences , desires , and wishes , and the capacity to accept or to attempt to change them . by exercising such a capacity , persons define their nature , give meaning and coherence to their lives , and take responsibility for the kind of person they are . the principle of autonomy in the context of health care draws attention to the fact that each individual has personal beliefs and values , and their own life plan ; it states therefore that competent individuals are in the best position to make decisions regarding potential medical interventions . the value of autonomy is ultimately based on respect for persons , and the preservation of their dignity . in health care , respect for autonomy is typically contrasted with paternalism . paternalism is the intentional overriding of one person 's known preferences or actions by another person , where the person who overrides justifies the action by the goal of benefiting or avoiding harm to the person whose will is overridden . while in many cultures doctors have traditionally played this role in relation to their patients , autonomy is now widely accepted as a core ethical principle of medicine . respect for autonomy emphasizes the value of a competent individual 's informed and voluntary decisions . however , as noted earlier , the gap between policy and practice can be wide , and in many countries paternalistic medical structures persist . women may be especially vulnerable to paternalism in medicine , particularly if they are illiterate or have had limited access to education , and/or live in societies where gender norms constrain women 's autonomous decision-making and encourage women to defer to authority , particularly male authority . a requirement of autonomy is the practical ability to act on decisions . in practice , autonomous choice depends on the availability of economically , socially , and legally viable alternatives . limited resources both material and human/personal and societal can significantly limit the scope of autonomy . further , social expectations based on sex , class , and ethnicity can affect the availability of viable alternatives . informed consent the principles of informed consent in the context of genetic testing are upheld in several human rights instruments . obtaining informed consent to genetic testing and screening is essential to promote individual autonomy in medical decision-making . the process of gaining informed consent aims to ensure that the individual understands the relevant information ( medical , social , and/or legal ) and that their decision to undergo any medical intervention is made voluntarily . valid informed consent for genetic testing requires a bilateral process involving a dialogue of questions and answers between the individual considering testing and the person obtaining informed consent ( often a health care professional ) . this dialogue requires the person obtaining informed consent to gauge the appropriate level of language and technical detail suitable for the individual 's understanding . preconditions the person considering testing should be competent to make autonomous decisions ( for example , children and persons with mental impairment may or may not be considered competent ; local laws and regulations often provide further guidance on the requirements for competency ) ; aware that the decision to undergo testing is voluntary ; and substantially free from control by others ( for example , there should be no coercion , subordination , and undue influence ) . consent : the individual makes an autonomous decision to undergo or refuse testing . individuals may choose not to make an immediate decision or may subsequently change their mind ; even after the test has been performed , individuals may choose not to receive the test results . authorization : this is the formal process of recording the individual 's informed consent to undergo testing , usually in writing . specific authorization forms differ between institutions ; however , it is good practice for these forms to include a record of the issues discussed prior to consent . practices like these may vary ; the fundamental principles underlying this model should be adhered to . for example , illiteracy is not an excuse for doing away with authorization . informed consent in developing countries—most developed and some developing countries—have enacted legislation requiring that informed consent is obtained for medical procedures , including genetic testing . under peruvian law , consent is required for medical treatment , except in the event of an emergency . each person must be given all information necessary to give informed consent or refusal prior to any treatment . this includes the right to receive comprehensive and comprehensible information about his or her condition , including diagnosis , prognosis , alternative treatments , and the risks associated with treatments prescribed and administered . individuals also have the right not to be subjected to non-consensual examination or treatment . the public health code of guinea requires that individual autonomy and the right to self-determination of all people be respected in relation to health care . turkish law contains various provisions designed to promote autonomous choice in medical treatment . the fijian constitution holds that every person has the right to freedom from scientific or medical treatment or procedures without his or her informed consent , or , if he or she is incapable of giving informed consent , without the informed consent of a lawful guardian . counselling : genetic counselling is the process by which individuals at risk of a disorder that may be hereditary are advised of the consequences of the disorder , the probability of developing or transmitting it , and the ways in which this may be prevented , avoided , or ameliorated . it is an acknowledged standard of practice that this be done in a respectful , non-directive , and confidential manner . genetic counselling is a service that aims to respect , protect , and foster individual autonomy when decisions are made regarding the use of medical genetic services , for example , genetic testing . the primary role of genetic counsellors is to facilitate autonomous decision-making . many developed countries have established training programmes to generate specialized genetic counsellors to work alongside clinical geneticists in providing tertiary-level genetic services . in these specialist tertiary care settings , a genetic counsellor works within a multidisciplinary team and acts as the primary liaison between the patient and other medical professionals . genetic counsellors can also act as a knowledge resource and educator for other health professionals , as well as the general public . in most developed and developing countries , there is a severe shortage of genetic counsellors . inequities in access to genetic counselling should be tackled with proper funding and training of different kinds of health professionals at the primary health care level . in the late 1990s , with the help of outside funding and collaboration between oxford university and the university of toronto , a national thalassaemia treatment centre was built in kurunegala , sri lanka , and a central diagnostic laboratory was established at ragama . this site was selected because , although thalassaemia occurs in many communities throughout sri lanka , by far the largest number attend the government hospital at kurunegala , where close to 500 patients are registered . after a preliminary study to assess the frequency of thalassaemia throughout the country , patients attending the main centres were fully genotyped . it was found that between 10 and 30 % of the patients had hb e-thalassaemia while the rest had transfusion-dependent -thalassaemia major . blood is available for transfusion , and the government supplies desferrioxamine , * although there has been a shortage of the drug at times and an even greater shortage of pumps to administer it . the quality of clinical care and documentation in kurunegala is now quite high , although there is much work to be done in the other centres in the country . as the programme evolved , it became clear that counselling and support for the families of thalassaemic children would be critical and that the sri lankan doctors looking after these patients would have very limited time for this purpose . for these reasons , it was decided to try to conduct a pilot programme to examine the social consequences and related ethical issues affecting the thalassaemia population in kurunegala . there are very few trained counsellors , and even fewer genetic counsellors , in sri lanka . however , the centre became aware of the work of the reverend father anthony fernando , who obtained his ph.d. in psychology in the united states . father anthony runs a 12-month formal course in counselling , though not specifically genetic counselling , at the university of peradeniya . one of the students on this course , mr h.g . sampath , joined the national thalassaemia centre in kurunegala , first on a voluntary basis , and then with some small financial help from the local parents thalassaemia association . he sees all the patients and their families in the clinic and has been able to make a number of home visits . the latter is extremely difficult because many of the patients live long distances from the hospital in villages that can only be reached by bus.patients : thalassaemic patients are sometimes isolated in society , and , in the past , when blood for their transfusions had to come from their family members , they were labelled blood suckers . as a result of adverse public responses to their disease , a proportion of the children do not attend school , and adolescent patients tend to drop out of school and disengage with society . this is exacerbated by the schools ' tendency not to allow the thalassaemic children to take part in extra-curricular activities . the preliminary report notes that there is also a tendency for the children to despise their parents as they get older , and many blame them for their disease . particular stresses occur among children who are born into families with unaffected children as this seems to add further to their exclusion from family life . in families with multiple affected children , the death of one causes severe psychological trauma to the remaining child ( ren ) . parents : preliminary counselling in the hospital has clearly done little to increase understanding of thalassaemia among many of the parents and families . husbands tend to blame their wives for the disease in their child . there are misconceptions about the cause of thalassaemia , and it is widely believed that it results from drugs administered during pregnancy . a considerable number of the parents have resorted to local healers , and there is an increasingly high frequency of depressive illness with several suicides among the mothers . these problems have been exacerbated by other family strains , including the diversion of the mother 's attention to the children at the expense of the husband , and a decrease in the wife 's sexual responses due to stress or fear of bearing another thalassaemic child . challenges : it is clear that the initial time-consuming explanation of the nature of genetic disease , and the patterns of its inheritance , are still very difficult for much of the population to understand . it is also extremely difficult to persuade people found to be carriers that the heterozygous state is not a disease . women feel particularly isolated when they are found to be carriers because in a society with a large number of arranged marriages , they feel they may never marry . there have been preliminary debates on the possibility of developing prenatal diagnosis programmes , but termination of pregnancy is illegal in sri lanka ( even though a very large number of terminations occur annually ) . despite these concerns and the pressures on the clinics , disease management is improving , as is the morale of patients in kurunegala . there is an urgent need to train counsellors in developing countries . a counselling course has been developed in sri lanka , by the department of clinical genetics in colombo , and it is planned to try to obtain at least one fully trained counsellor for each centre on the island . a great deal more research needs to be undertaken into the best ways of educating populations , particularly those with little formal education , about the complexities of genetic disease . this work needs to be followed up by an equally careful assessment of the outcomes . above all , it is clear that because of the complex social structures of different societies in developing countries , it can not be assumed that methods that are used in high-resource settings will be applicable . at least from the very preliminary observations in sri lanka , it appears that the social and ethical problems raised by the thalassaemias , and their effects on families , have been grossly underestimated in our thinking about the development of thalassaemia services . * desferrioxamine is a medicine that binds to excess iron in the body and allows it to be excreted , therefore avoiding excess iron build-up in the body which results from regular blood transfusions.directive counselling : as noted above , a well-accepted goal of genetic counselling is the promotion of autonomy and human dignity by assisting people to make independent and voluntary decisions . scaling up genetic counselling capacity in saudi arabia : premarital screening for sickle cell disease and -thalassaemia is now compulsory in the kingdom of saudi arabia . this screening programme has apparently been well-received by the community because it allows couples to make informed decisions about marriage with knowledge of the reproductive risks and prenatal options , and it has not been linked to enforced prevention of genetically at-risk marriages . however , the current lack of genetic counsellors in the kingdom of saudi arabia poses an immediate problem for preventive programmes designed to reduce the occurrence of genetic diseases . as an interim solution , short intensive training programmes for medical and health science professionals are being established . these are typically conducted at major hospitals on an ad hoc basis , although a national training programme for genetic counsellors is under consideration . the medical genetics department at the king faisal specialist hospital research centre is establishing a short generic genetics training programme ; the diabetes centre at the king abdul aziz university hospital in riyadh runs an intense diabetic educators programme for individuals working in diabetic care . both of these courses specifically address genetic counselling and include presentations by qualified genetic counsellors . health professionals involved in the compulsory premarital screening program for sickle cell disease and thalassaemia receive instruction in the genetics of these diseases . it is envisaged that professionals who receive training in these programs will work alongside qualified medical professionals to provide basic genetic counselling . however , we argue in this report that participation in genetic testing and screening programs should be voluntary . however , in practice , pure non-directiveness can be difficult if not impossible to achieve . both counsellors ' unavoidable personal views and biases , and patients ' expectations that their physician will offer advice , can present challenges to the principle of non-directiveness . it is therefore important to distinguish between 1 ) medical knowledge , experience , and advice on the one hand ; and 2 ) personal values , life plans , and autonomous decisions on the other . physicians can and should offer medical advice , and this guidance may be very helpful for the individual or couple . in offering this advice , physicians should be aware of their own biases and should not attempt to manipulate the values or the decision of the couple . decisions are made not only on the basis of knowledge , in this case , medical knowledge , but also personal values . it is for this reason that the individual should make the final decision about the appropriate course of action for them . there may be a role for physicians to challenge the couples ' decision to ensure that it is autonomous and that they have deliberated sufficiently about the available choice . despite ongoing debate about the precise standards of non-directiveness , the essential point is that counsellors and physicians should present information in as unbiased a manner as possible ; should not attempt to manipulate the individuals ' or couples ' decision-making process ; and should respect the autonomous decision of the individual or couple . directive genetic counselling is thought to be a widespread problem , occurring not only in countries that appear to endorse this approach but also those that formally discourage or even ban this practice . the directive nature of genetic counselling in china has attracted attention . in 1995 , the chinese law on maternal and child health care came into effect . international concern focused on articles 10 and 18. article 10 states that after providing a premarital physical check-up , physicians should inform the couple if they have been diagnosed with a genetic disease that is considered inappropriate for childbearing from a medical point of view . the couple may then be married only if they a ) agree to long-term contraception or b ) undergo a tubal ligation , hysterectomy , or vasectomy . in addition , article 18 of the maternal and child health law states that the physician shall give the couple medical advice for termination of pregnancy if 1 ) the fetus is suffering from a genetic disease of a serious nature ; 2 ) the fetus is found to have a defect of a serious nature ; or 3 ) the continuation of pregnancy seriously endangers the life of the mother . however , it should be noted that there are no enforcement mechanisms in place for this law , and it is viewed more as a standard of care . this approach to counselling appears to be directive . the language used , at least in the translations accessed by who , is not restricted to informing , warning , or supporting the couple to make an independent choice but extends to offering specific advice to terminate the pregnancy . whether in practice , this results in directive counselling depends on whether the advice is limited to unbiased medical information or extends to trying to influence the couples ' values and their decisions regarding abortion . one possible motivation for this approach to counselling is the public benefit of reducing the health burden of congenital diseases . for example , chinese minister of public health chen minzhang has stressed that the cost of looking after those with hereditary handicaps was enormous , imposing a heavy burden both on the state and on millions of families . in developed , high-income countries with good public health infrastructure , the cost of caring for a child born with a genetic disorder is often carried , partly or fully , by the state . however , in many developing countries , neither families nor governments have the financial resources to care for and support a significant number of children with severe genetic disorders . in india , for example , prenatal diagnosis ( pnd ) is seen as an important preventive measure to reduce the burden of β-thalassaemia . it has been reported that after pnd parents are counselled to continue the pregnancy only in the case of unaffected fetuses . prevention is indeed an essential part of comprehensive medical genetic services , but this perceived tension between care and prevention represents a false dichotomy . as programs in cuba , cyprus , the islamic republic of iran , and thailand demonstrate , prevention of the occurrence of genetic disease and care of those affected go hand in hand . appropriate care for affected individuals reduces stigma and increases trust in the public health system , thereby improving the effectiveness of prevention programs ; while effective prevention programs free resources for the care of individuals with the disease . furthermore , evidence suggests that a high proportion of couples will voluntarily choose to terminate pregnancies that are affected by a severe genetic condition when safe abortion services are available . another possible reason for the use of directive counselling in developing countries may be the pervasive tradition of paternalism in medicine . for example , where there are high rates of illiteracy among the general public , many physicians take a paternalistic stance that it is their duty to direct a less-educated population . some individuals expect to be told what to do by their doctors and so do not question this directive approach . there is an important distinction , however , between making an autonomous choice to accept medical advice from a physician , and a prima facie assumption that it is the physician 's role and responsibility to decide what interventions are in their patients ' best interests . sub-populations with lower rates of literacy , typically women and those of a lower socioeconomic strata , are more likely to experience medical paternalism . despite the pervasiveness of the paternalistic approach to health care in many countries , it is important to re-emphasize the value of autonomy . decisions regarding health and reproduction are deeply personal and are typically made based on both information and values . while health care professionals should offer advice regarding the medical genetics services in developing countries known health consequences of specific interventions , patients themselves are in the best position to know their own personal values . it is important that once health care professionals have discussed the medical implications of potential treatment options with the patient , the patients are then encouraged to make autonomous decisions . patient support organizations support organizations worldwide provide valuable resources for both patients and health care providers . support groups often have the most up-to-date information on genetic research and available tests and treatments , particularly for rare genetic diseases . such groups are valuable in providing long-term support for affected persons and can be very effective when working alongside regional genetic services . they can provide a good network for collecting and coordinating funds for research and other resources . for example , the local parents thalassaemia association in kurunegala , sri lanka , raised funds for a counsellor to be employed for the patients and families receiving treatment at the national thalassaemia centre in kurunegala . support organizations can also act as a platform for communication with affected communities , especially those that have difficulty accessing genetic services . they can facilitate the recruitment of research subjects , contact large family groups , and disseminate new information . even developed countries have a shortage of specialized genetic counsellors , and therefore such services are often supplemented by patient support organizations . for example , the majority of public education about tay-sachs disease in the united kingdom is conducted by volunteers from the charitable organization jewish care . while the organization currently seems to be able to fulfill the education needs of those affected by the disease , the situation does raise the question of whether governments and public health systems should be relying on a charity or volunteer organization to provide disease education and counselling for affected families and their communities . parents ' associations have played a fundamental role in improving β-thalassaemia treatment and population screening in many mediterranean countries over the last 25 years . the thalassaemia prevention strategy in cyprus consists of four interdependent techniques : 1 ) public education , 2 ) population screening , 3 ) genetic counselling , and 4 ) pnd . the program is extremely successful , and cases of thalassaemia declined by 97 % between 1975 and 1984. part of the success of the program has been attributed to the very active parents association and the supportive role of the orthodox church . the cyprus parents association argued strongly in favour of a premarital thalassaemia certificate . in 1983 , the orthodox church , although it does not support termination of affected pregnancies , agreed to the prerequisite that all couples undergo carrier screening for thalassaemia and receive genetic counselling before marriage . carrier couples are not prevented from marrying . the thalassaemia international federation ( tif ) was established in 1986 by a small group of thalassaemia patients and parents from cyprus , italy , the united kingdom , and the united states . tif works to improve awareness and support prevention of thalassaemia and promote clinical management of affected patients . tif also collaborates with governments and official health bodies , such as who . tif runs regional and national workshops on the treatment and prevention of thalassaemias , including genetic counselling ; produces educational material for patients , families , and physicians around the world ( which is distributed free of charge ) ; and provides networks for health professionals involved with thalassaemia care , among other activities . case study 4 illustrates the essential role that patient support organizations can play in low-resource settings . medical genetics services in developing countries nigeria 2001-2003 background sickle cell disease is a widespread problem in africa . its prevalence is partly due to the fact that carriers may be protected against some forms of malaria . in africa , an estimated 7.4/1000 children are born affected with sickle cell disease , and this figure reaches as high as 14.8/1000 in west africa . sickle cell disease is thought to be responsible for 4 % of under-5 mortality in west and middle africa . in nigeria , sickle cell disease is stigmatized , largely due to the almost complete lack of appropriate or affordable services . for this reason , virtually all nigerian couples with affected fetuses opt for termination of pregnancy . in the absence of genetic services for sickle cell disease , patient support and advocacy groups , such as the sickle cell club ( scc ) , play a significant role . the scc is a non-governmental organization present in a few centers in nigeria and run by volunteers . membership of the scc comprises a disproportionate number of the poorer members of society , as more affluent families are deterred by the stigma associated with sickle cell disease . the scc runs a pnd service by cvs , with samples sent to their collaborating perinatal unit in london for molecular diagnosis . prenatal genetic testing is still beyond the financial means of the vast majority of nigerians , partly because test samples must be sent abroad for analysis . the service costs us $ 400 , of which us $ 265 is transferred to the perinatal unit in london . sending the samples abroad can also result in delays in receiving results . meeting the potential demand for prenatal genetic testing requires that molecular diagnosis be available locally . it should be noted that molecular testing is not necessary to determine carrier status for sickle cell disease , which can be determined by a phenotypic test , using a simple hemoglobin electrophoresis . case description mr. and mrs. a married in 2001. before then , their families had insisted on determining their genotypes to ensure that they did not bear children with sickle cell disease . this was principally because mr. a 's elder brother had lost a number of children to sickle cell disease . mr. a already knew that he was a carrier . when mrs. a took the genetic test , offered by a commercial testing company , she was told she was not a carrier , so they married . during mrs. a 's first pregnancy , she went to a hospital for antenatal care . she was informed by a visiting obstetrician that a routine test had shown her to be a carrier for sickle cell disease . she questioned the result but it was subsequently confirmed . mrs. a inquired about prenatal diagnosis ( pnd ) but was informed by her physician that at six months the pregnancy was too advanced . the child was a carrier and has remained healthy . she delivered her second child without the benefit of prenatal diagnosis . at 9 months , he was diagnosed with sickle cell disease , and at 18 months , his symptoms were treated with blood transfusion , antibiotics , and antimalarial drugs . he recovered and is receiving daily prophylactic treatment , folic acid , and vitamin b-complex tablets . the sickle cell club ( scc ) provided advice regarding the medical management of his disorder and arranged to enroll him in a well-run and highly subsidized clinic . the family remains anxious about his health and their ability to cope with the cost of frequent illness . their third child was also born without pnd . he died of an undiagnosed illness at 4 months . the child 's genotype had not been determined , but the parents feared that he might have been affected by sickle cell disease . both parents were understandably shocked and upset , and mrs. a felt guilty that her inaccurate genetic test result encouraged their marriage . mrs. a reported her fourth pregnancy early because she was , by that stage , eager to have pnd . mr. and mrs. a were not able to afford the us $ 400 fee for the test , so the scc raised sufficient funds through private donations from members to cover the cost . the couple were counseled prior to the cvs . the fetus was found to have sickle cell disease , and the couple opted for termination of pregnancy . the scc was again able to contribute part of the fee for termination . mrs. a expressed a desire to have more children , but the couple did not believe that they would be able to afford future pnd or terminations . role of a patient support organization in sickle cell disease diagnosis and treatment in nigeria continued . medical genetics services in developing countries ethical , legal , and social issues both mr. and mrs. a were certain that the marriage would not have been contracted if they had known the carrier status of mrs. a. the couple are both nigerians of igbo descent and are roman catholics , neither of which supports divorce . some churches in nigeria refuse to marry carrier couples , which can have the unintended consequence of increasing stigmatization and falsification of test results . genetic services and pnd are financially inaccessible to the majority of the population . the service is only available in lagos and is not subsidized by the government . the absence of well-regulated laboratories has also allowed for the growth of commercial laboratories , some of which are suspected of issuing inaccurate results . the scc was a valuable resource for this family in terms of coordinating funds for pnd and the abortion , as well as coordinating care for their affected son , particularly as there were no alternative services available in the public health system . a publicly available genetic testing service , with appropriate quality assurance standards , informed consent guidelines , and genetic counseling would have reduced the emotional and financial stress placed on this family . this case study illustrates a few of the many problems arising from the neglect of sickle cell disease in sub-saharan africa . the sickle cell foundation nigeria is developing a national sickle cell center , which will introduce genetic services and continue to advocate for their integration into primary health care . this study is based on information provided by dr. olu akinyanju , founder , and chairman of the sickle cell foundation , nigeria . assisting the development of patient support organizations in developing countries one program in place that could act as a model for measures to establish , support , and coordinate patient support groups in developing countries is the world federation of hemophilia ( wfh ) . the wfh is an umbrella organization that represents ... case study 4 hemophilia patient support groups globally . it runs a twinning program , where genetics clinics in developing nations are paired with clinics in developed countries for training and workshops . this allows for sharing of information about the disease , safety of treatments , care options , counseling , and prevention options . cystic fibrosis worldwide ( cfw ) is another international non-profit organization ( based in the united states ) dedicated to improving the quality of care and education for those individuals living with cystic fibrosis in developing countries . recently , cfw has commenced a project in the republic of georgia to develop sustainable delivery of clinical care , access to medicine and to facilitate the spread of education in the treatment of cf . cfw also works to promote and improve knowledge of cf among medical professionals and governments worldwide by serving as an international platform for the exchange of information . in brazil , the cf brazilian association has been influential in the development of , and active in supporting the implementation of , the national newborn screening program . despite the positive example provided by the scc and other patient/parent organizations highlighted throughout the report , patient support groups should not be seen as an alternative to the services provided by a genetic counselor . genetic counseling is a medical specialization that requires specific training , for example , in the skills required to facilitate individuals ' decision-making in a non-directive manner . however , a severe lack of genetic counselors in developing countries , even those nations with more advanced genetic services in place such as brazil and india , means that patient support groups and untrained medical staff are often called upon as the only available resource to provide genetic counseling . further , the weakness of the health care infrastructure and the lack of recognition of genetic diseases in many developing countries result in the burden of genetic counseling falling on support organizations , as they have both the experience and the motivation to assist other affected families . ideally , patient support groups would work in conjunction with a medical team , including a genetic counselor , to medical genetics services in developing countries provide the patient and family with the full spectrum of medical genetic services . conclusion genetic counseling is a specialist service that aims to foster individual autonomy during the decision-making process about the use of medical genetic services . patients ' informed and voluntary consent are a prerequisite for medical intervention , and genetic counselors help to ensure that patients understand the relevant information , including potential risks and benefits , before making a decision to undergo genetic testing . if testing is carried out , counselors are responsible for explaining to patients the results of tests and facilitating , in a non-directive manner , decision-making about the appropriate course of action for the specific patient . there are insufficient numbers of genetic counselors worldwide , but particularly in developing countries . the rapid rise in the availability of genetic tests has restricted access to genetic counseling , in many instances , to cases where genetic tests are ordered through a physician or health care provider . some countries , such as saudi arabia , are implementing interim measures to provide health care professionals and geneticists with short courses in counseling . in both developed and developing countries , patient support organizations play an important role in educating and supporting patients and affected families . this valuable resource should be acknowledged , and support groups should be encouraged to work alongside medical professionals and genetic counselors ; however , support organizations should not be viewed as an alternative to genetic counseling , which involves specialist skills and specific training . education both developed and developing countries need to improve community awareness of , and knowledge about , genetics , the relationship between genotype and phenotype , the process of genetic inheritance , and the implications of carrier status for reproductive decisions . a good education of the public supports the effectiveness of genetic services , can increase the reproductive choices available to the community , and helps to prevent discrimination and stigmatization . knowledge within a community typically varies according to class , gender , and profession , among others , as a result of differences in literacy , education , and social mobility . public education campaigns need to be cognizant of the different levels of , and barriers to , education among sub-populations within a community . in developed countries , particularly the united kingdom , the assumption that the public 's technical knowledge of science is inadequate and needs to be addressed through unidirectional education by scientists has become known as the deficit model of public understanding . in response , social scientists have sought to legitimize the relevance of lay perspectives and values and to replace the deficit model with a bidirectional dialogue model . throughout the report , we highlight the importance of inter-sectoral communications and dialogue as the basis for effective public policy . cultural and religious views about genetics and inheritance should be taken into account when developing public policy so that it is relevant and specific to the needs of a particular society . however , the following discussion about public , patient , and physician understanding of genetics in developing countries focuses on the implications of genetic knowledge for clinical and reproductive decision-making rather than policy development . education is an important tool for combating discrimination and stigmatization of genetic conditions and empowering vulnerable sections of the community . the aim of public education in genetics , in this context , is to empower people to make their own decisions in ways that maximize their well-being and health . medical genetics services in developing countries . public understanding of genetics and inheritance the lack of general education about genetics in developing countries presents a barrier to the successful implementation of genetic services . studies conducted in some developing countries demonstrate that the level of community knowledge and understanding about genetics is low . as a result , misconceptions about genetic testing services and genetic diseases are common in these populations . for programs that diagnose and treat genetic disorders to be effective , the community in which they operate must be educated about the nature of genetic diseases and how to access testing and treatment services . without such knowledge , many people may fail to receive treatment for diseases or to undergo testing for carrier status before reproducing because they are not aware that they may be at risk of passing a genetic disease on to their children or do not know where to seek medical advice . further , people may fail to seek appropriate treatment as a consequence of limited knowledge of genetic diseases . for example , it has been reported that in ecuador some people seek treatment from shamans not only because they have little understanding of genetic diseases but also because they are unaware of where to seek information or counseling in relation to the disorders . the example of screening programs in the kingdom of bahrain demonstrates how effective education campaigns can be in raising education levels and avoiding some of these problems . even when people are aware that services are available , low education levels in some developing countries and limited familiarity with genetic medicine present special obstacles to obtaining truly informed consent . as genetic services become available in developing countries , it is important to ensure that the community 's level of knowledge of genetics is sufficient to enable people to make informed autonomous decisions about their health . education should also seek to overcome the socio-cultural barriers that affect women 's ability to access medical genetic services , even when they know they exist . public education public education about genetics is an indispensable platform upon which to introduce widespread genetic testing and screening . such programs should be culturally sensitive and provide information in a manner that takes account of religious and traditional beliefs and attitudes toward medical care to effectively target information toward different sectors of the community in a way that will maximize accessibility . who experts have recommended that genetic education programs should target the general public using courses and workshops ; such education programs should be implemented in schools and community organizations . if there are social barriers preventing women or other groups from entering these public spaces and actively engaging in these activities , material will need to be delivered through other channels . education programs should start with an initial assessment of the educational requirements of different groups and the best methods for reaching target audiences . these programs should encompass the elsi of genetics , as well as providing a good understanding of the basic science of genetics and inherited disorders , dissemination approaches should take into account local literacy levels . the information should be easy to understand , and it also should be free from derogatory , guilt-provoking , or discriminatory overtones . information should also actively redress assumptions and beliefs leading to the stigmatization and discrimination of certain groups , for example , the assumption that women are to blame for the occurrence of genetic diseases in their children . major barriers to public education about genetic information are high rates of illiteracy and low standards of education , which make it difficult to communicate complex genetic concepts . these barriers typically affect women more significantly in developing countries because they often have lower rates of literacy than males . there is stigma attached to carrier status and to some medical services associated with genetic testing , like selective abortion of affected fetuses . such stigma can make the subject of genetic testing and screening taboo , resulting in a reluctance to initiate discussion about genetic disease . a lack of understanding about the relationship between individuals who have genetic diseases and those who carry the relevant allele can similarly present a barrier to effective control of genetic diseases . as with other autosomal recessive disorders , beta-thalassaemia presents challenges for genetic counselling and public education because carriers express the beta-thalassaemia trait but are apparently healthy . carriers can therefore be in denial about the implications of their carrier status for the health of their children . countries with decentralized rural populations also face geographical barriers regarding how and where to target education programmes and resources . schools are a common choice for education about early onset childhood diseases , but the proportion of children who actually attend school must also be taken into account . hospitals are another common choice since many women will access a hospital at some point during a pregnancy . however , this rules out preconception intervention , and women in rural communities may still not have access to prenatal health care services . outreach clinics and organizations will be critical in such areas . targeting education to patient support groups can be effective , as significant sections of the target population will have already been identified and have an established communication network . public education programmes , in the context of genetic screening for common recessive diseases , have been successfully implemented in cuba ( sickle cell disease ) and cyprus ( beta-thalassaemia ) , with decreases in the prevalence of each disease of 30 % and 97 % respectively . in cuba , public education was achieved through the mass media and was also targeted at women attending hospital for antenatal care . similarly , cyprus used the mass media ( tv , radio ) to improve public education , along with talks targeted to smaller groups , school education , an information booklet , and the initiation of a thalassaemia awareness week . much of the program 's success is attributed to the small population of cyprus ; in such small communities , many members of the public are in contact with an affected person , and there is therefore a good base of general awareness upon which to build education campaigns . international patient organizations such as cfw , tif , and wfh have played a key role in providing public education resources , particularly in developing countries . case study 5 provides a more detailed example of the role of education in the success of a national screening programme . interestingly , the kingdom of bahrain , like cyprus , is an island with a small population , many of whom have known an affected individual or family , and it seems likely that this geographical context plays an important role in the successful implementation of such programmes . medical genetics services in developing countries case study 5 student screening and public education in the kingdom of bahrain ministry of health , kingdom of bahrain , 1999-ongoing background a newborn screening study conducted between 1984 and 1985 in the kingdom of bahrain showed that 2.1 % of newborns had sickle cell disease , 11.2 % were carriers of the abnormal allele for sickle cell disease , and 20 % were born with glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency ( g6pd ) . a 1994 premarital counselling study further revealed that 24 % of people screened were carriers for beta-thalassaemia . description of the project the national student screening project ( nssp ) was designed to ( a ) gather epidemiological data about prevalence rates of carriers of sickle cell disease , thalassaemia , and g6pd in the community ; and ( b ) provide teenagers and their families with the opportunity to discover their carrier status for these disorders prior to making decisions about marriage and reproduction . the nssp also aimed to : raise awareness among young people about these diseases through a comprehensive education campaign , thereby empowering them to make informed reproductive decisions in the future ; establish a database registry for all screened affected students ; identify the geographic distribution of carriers of these disorders ; and identify the frequency of rare abnormal haemoglobin variants . in order to ensure equitable access to the genetic screening service , testing is offered to all students in the 11th grade of secondary school , in both public and private schools , with 7000-8000 students targeted every year . the ministry of health has provided training sessions for teachers , in addition to school nurses and doctors , who are then responsible for educating the students about these diseases through educational sessions . students and families are also supplied with information leaflets and booklets . testing is voluntary , and permission for screening is taken from parents or directly from students if they are 18 years or older . the informed consent forms contain general information about the project and a description of the benefits of the project for students . so far , approximately 80-85 % of parents or students have voluntarily agreed to be tested each year . test results are returned to students on a standardized official medical report card and are delivered via their school in a sealed envelope , with students encouraged to open their envelopes at home with their families . in order to protect privacy and confidentiality , all samples stored in the central database are anonymously coded . each school receives reports on the prevalence of the three diseases in their student body . the project takes six months on average every year for planning , education sessions , blood collection , laboratory testing , data processing , the distribution of report cards , data analysis , and delivery of results . the estimated cost per student is us $ 67 , which covers laboratory costs , human resources , and educational materials . challenges the public was initially resistant to the screening programme because they feared that girls identified as carriers would not be able to find a husband . the education campaigns therefore stressed that ( a ) all people carry some defective genes ; ( b ) carriers could avoid the risk of giving birth to an affected child if they married a non-carrier ; and ( c ) no one , including carrier-carrier couples , would be prevented from marrying . broad-based public campaigns were also required to encourage parents and students to agree to screening . the ministries of health and education were initially reluctant to prioritize genetic screening over other public health demands . however , they were convinced by epidemiological data demonstrating the high birth prevalence of the three disorders . since its inception in 1999 , the project has significantly increased awareness of the three disorders , and more than 35,000 students have been screened . this study of student screening for genetic blood diseases in the kingdom of bahrain is based on information provided by dr. shaikha al arrayed , head of the national committee for the prevention of genetic diseases . medical genetics services in developing countries the bahrain premarital screening programme and the above student screening programme , both of which included comprehensive public education programmes , have , in combination , been highly effective . the rate at birth of sickle cell disease has decreased from 2.1 % in 1984-1985 to 0.9 % in 2005 , a decrease of 60 % . health-care providers ' knowledge about genetic services education levels among health care providers also present a challenge to effective public education . primary health care providers ( general practitioners , clinic nurses ) are often poorly informed about genetic disorders and available genetic services and so are often unable to pass relevant information on to their patients . this is a problem in developed nations as well , where many general practitioners do not consistently assess genetic risk , do not refer at-risk patients to genetic services , and are not aware which services are available . education of health professionals at a local level must go hand in hand with public education in both developed and developing nations . in addition to general knowledge about genetics , health professionals ' training should include the basic principles of genetic counselling , and the primary ethical , legal , and social issues associated with medical genetic services . the who report `` genomics and world health `` noted that the information generated by genomics will , over time , aid in the treatment and prevention , not only of single-gene disorders but also of other common killers and causes of chronic disease involving significant genetic predispositions , such as cancer , cardiovascular disease , diabetes , and mental health . it is , therefore , important to stress the importance of ensuring that general medical staff have training that enables them to competently discuss with patients genetic information relevant to a wide range of pathologies . to this end , governments should ensure firstly that genetics is a component of all medical training and secondly that health professionals have regular opportunities to access continuing education to update their knowledge of genetics . patient well-being : quality assurance and patient safety patient well-being is an overarching concern that encompasses many of the issues already discussed . arguments for comprehensive treatment and prevention services are essentially about fostering patient and family well-being . in this section , we discuss two issues that are not always thought of as components of patient well-being : quality assurance standards and commercial testing . genetic testing and screening raise particular issues in relation to quality assurance and patient safety , in part due to how a community and its members understand the meaning of genetic information . while there is a common perception that genetic information differs in some ways from other medical information , there is substantial debate about the nature and degree of this difference . the knowledge that one is a carrier of a genetic disease can have implications for potential reproductive partners and future children . genetic information can indicate that a person will develop a disorder in the future , despite being currently well , as in the case of late-onset diseases such as huntington 's disease . genetic information may also indicate that a person is predisposed to developing a disorder , but because of the complex multifactorial factors involved in disease development , geneticists can not convert this knowledge into a precise outcome , only a more general risk value . genetic information about one individual can also reveal information about his or her wider family . the view that genetic information is sufficiently different from other health care information to raise unique social issues has been referred to as genetic exceptionalism . this view supports the establishment of separate regulations for managing and protecting genetic information . on the other hand , others have argued that the exceptionalism of genetic information has been exaggerated . supporters of this position argue that almost everything relevant to human health has some measure of influence by genetic factors and at the same time , very little about our health is determined only by our genome , much less by one gene . on this view , the dualism created between genetic and other medical information is unjustified and misleading . furthermore , there are multiple examples of medical tests , such as those measuring blood pressure , cholesterol level , and bone density , that provide insight into individual and familial risk of disease but have traditionally not been subject to requirements for genetic counselling or genetically oriented informed consent processes . despite this controversy , it is clear that many people believe that genetic information , because of its heritable nature , is different from other medical information and therefore find genetic information ( particularly that relating to predispositions and information that affects other family members more upsetting and challenging than other medical information . countries should determine , on an individual basis , the degree to which they believe it is necessary to introduce specific regulations relating to genetic information in order to protect patients from the harm associated with unnecessary or inaccurate genetic testing . quality and safety : quality and safety standards for genetic testing aim to ensure accuracy of results and to protect patients from the range of possible risks associated with testing . accuracy of results is particularly important given the emotional and psychological effect that testing may have on patients and their families . despite this , some countries do not have adequate systems in place to regulate and standardize laboratory practices . as a result , insufficient or incorrect information may be provided to patients . information may also not be provided in a timeframe that allows for a full range of options , interventions , or treatments . in the case of misplaced , misidentified , or mistreated samples , information may not be provided at all . quality assurance : quality assurance covers a range of aspects of testing , including the decision to test , the accuracy of results , the delivery of results , and support following that delivery . at the testing stage , protocols should regulate handling and labeling of samples , testing procedures and interpretation and recording of results , in addition to laboratory accreditation . standards should address the analytical validity , clinical validity , and clinical utility of a test . as noted in the primer of medical genetics and genetic services , analytical validity is the test 's ability to detect the trait it seeks to measure . clinical validity refers to the test 's capacity to predict a particular clinical outcome , which gives the test meaning . clinical utility refers to whether the test can provide some guidance on how to treat the disorder . for example , tests that reveal a patient has an incurable or untreatable disorder have relatively low clinical utility . where treatment options exist , a test will have high clinical utility . once testing is completed , the results should be delivered to patients again in the context of non-directive genetic counseling . patients should be assisted to select a course of treatment appropriate for them and be made aware of their reproductive options . if the test indicates that the individual is affected by the disease , he or she should be informed of the support and management structures in place for patients with the disorder . developing quality assurance standards and mechanisms . quality assurance standards and mechanisms are generally developed and implemented at the national level . they often work as a coordinated system , where national governments establish and enforce standards , while private or professional bodies conduct external quality assurance schemes in line with these standards . however , the organization for economic development and cooperation ( oecd ) and who have also been working together to establish international standards and best practices . in large part , such standards are developed in , or directed at , more developed nations . the urgent need for the introduction of mandatory quality assurance programs for diagnostic laboratories was identified as a priority issue in a recent transnational genetics workshop held in the people 's republic of china . quality assurance measures in place in developing countries : some developing countries have begun to develop mechanisms to promote quality assurance and patient safety . turkish law regulates the establishment of genetic screening centers . authorizations and licenses are issued to establish and open genetic screening centers , and there is a range of requirements relating to methods , equipment , and personnel . indian law prescribes minimum requirements for equipment and premises of genetic laboratories , genetic clinics , and genetic counseling centers , and also establishes a licensing and registration scheme for these centers , which includes requirements for obtaining informed consent . some developing countries have also laid down requirements for the licensing and training of medical practitioners and others involved in genetic testing and screening services . for example , indian law lays down minimum qualifications of employees of genetic counseling centers , genetic laboratories , and genetic clinics that provide prenatal diagnostic services . it should be acknowledged that the development of quality and safety standards is often difficult for developing countries with limited resources . countries struggling to provide sufficient genetic testing and screening services may be reluctant to fund organizations to monitor and enforce quality standards or to license laboratories . further , many developing countries lack sufficient legal specialists with skills in drafting legislation . nevertheless , appropriate legislative and regulatory frameworks are necessary to ensure those testing and screening programs that are introduced function effectively and with maximum efficiency . investing in suitable legislation can prevent the waste of resources arising as a result of unregulated laboratories and the unnecessary use of genetic tests . anti-discrimination legislation also protects vulnerable members of the community by removing the informal barriers to genetic testing that result from fear of stigmatization . such fears limit the ability of programs to reach their target populations and therefore decrease the efficiency of screening programs . as regulation and legislation are a necessary component of effective testing and screening services , the international community should consider ways of encouraging capacity building and technology transfer in relevant public policy and legislation drafting skills . commercial testing : commercial genetic testing services pose problems in both developed and developing countries , although the nature and scope of these problems may vary between the two . in general , the provision of testing services through the private sector raises concerns about the proper regulation of testing processes to ensure results are accurate and that tests have sufficient utility . specific concerns relate to the quality of informed consent , the inequality of access to genetic services within the community , the accessibility of genetic counseling , and the unnecessary use of tests in a commercial environment . lower levels of general education and lack of regulation make private sector genetic testing in the absence of fully informed consent more acute in developing countries . in some countries , private sector testing may also lead to direct marketing of tests to the public , through the internet , for example , where individuals decide , in the absence of professional health care advice and support , to undergo genetic testing . in developing countries , the establishment of commercial testing facilities raises concerns about inequality of access to genetic services . commercial genetic testing services are available in a number of developing countries , including india , brazil , chile , colombia , ecuador , and other latin american countries . in some , the private sector is relatively well developed and provides services broadly . for example , in colombia , the majority of prenatal screening is carried out in private laboratories . in other countries , however , only very limited genetic testing services are provided by either the public or private sectors . for example , in paraguay , prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis is only available in the private sector and access is limited to the wealthiest sections of the population . due to their cost , commercial genetic services are generally available to only a small minority . who experts have expressed concerns that the low priority placed on the provision of genetic services by governments in latin america and the high cost of private testing services have resulted in inequitable access in this region . access barriers due to cost are most acute where local public and private health insurance schemes do not cover the cost of testing , as is the case in brazil , colombia , ecuador , and mexico city . cost is not only a barrier to poor women but to women whose access to family resources is restricted due to cultural norms . some commercial testing services are established locally or nationally ; however , it appears that overseas companies have also shown an interest in setting up commercial testing facilities in some developing countries . in most cases , commercial genetic testing services emerge in developing countries because many such countries do not publicly fund comprehensive medical genetic services . the private sector begins to provide testing in response to demand from the wealthier sections of the communities . service provision is driven by profit , and so the more commercially profitable services , such as prenatal diagnosis , dna paternity testing , and chromosome analysis , are typically the first to be provided . for example , penchaszadeh has noted that lack of regulation in latin america has resulted in the non-critical introduction of predictive genetic testing induced by commercial interests without clinical validation . considers the provision of commercial genetic services in brazil . private commercial genetic testing , including prenatal testing , is also often subject to few if any quality control measures . when services are not provided through public organizations , the absence of direct governmental responsibility means there is less incentive for governments to ensure these private services are well regulated . some developing countries , however , have put in place measures to regulate private testing . finally , where genetic testing services are split between public and private organizations , these services may become fragmented and lack integration . for example , some private laboratories conduct newborn screening in brazil , but do not offer treatment or subsequent care . as who experts have noted , genetics services can not exist as standalone vertical structures but should be integrated with related medical services . affected individuals or parents of an affected child require access to and guidance on the range of medical specialists who should be involved in managing the disorder . it is unlikely that a purely private genetic testing service will provide access to such coordinated care . as a result of a who consultation on community genetic services in latin america , a range of recommendations were made , some of which dealt specifically with concerns about commercial testing services . first , each country should develop systems to regulate the safety and effectiveness of privately provided testing . these systems should require that commercial genetic testing services establish mechanisms to protect the privacy and confidentiality of the genetic information they generate . they should also ensure that private testing occurs only once appropriate informed consent has been obtained and should outline what constitutes informed consent . finally , countries should require commercial laboratories to provide genetic counseling before and after testing , and this counseling should be sensitive to the cultural traditions and religious beliefs of the region . commercial genetic testing services in brazil : in brazil , 42 % of medical institutions that have a genetic clinic are private , and 61 % of clinical geneticists in that country work in private clinics either part-time or full-time . however , most comprehensive genetic services ( services that encompass all or most aspects of testing , from referral for testing through to testing and post-test counseling and treatment ) are located within tertiary care public university hospitals , which act as referral centers . samples from both public and private centers are often sent to other hospitals or to other states for testing , without any proper formal controls . one study of genetic services in brazil reported that the private sector is well developed in some more affluent areas , with services that include clinical evaluation and some laboratory studies , as well as prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal and monogenic conditions . cytogenetic and molecular testing are available in the private sector in some areas . prenatal ultrasound and amniocentesis services are also offered within the private sector in some states from the south and southeast regions , including minas gerais , paraná , rio grande do sul , and rio de janeiro . it has been reported that genetic testing services in rio de janeiro are comparable in quality to those in developed countries . the genetic testing services offered in brazil are not generally comprehensive or accompanied by formal genetic counseling , and physicians with little or no training in genetics often deliver test results . predictive genetic testing is also offered by some private laboratories , although again , genetic counseling is not routinely offered , and tests may be carried out despite a lack of evidence that the test has clinical validity or utility . as most private health insurance plans in brazil do not cover private sector genetic testing , access is limited to only the small proportion of brazilians who can afford to pay for these services . the development of medical genetic services that are both publicly funded and administered is the preferred means of introducing genetic testing to a developing country because it promotes equitable access and facilitates regulation and oversight . in the absence of publicly funded genetic services , it is important for countries to regulate the conduct and standards of private testing services and laboratories . conclusion , principles , and recommendations : comprehensive and integrated treatment and prevention services are needed to effectively reduce the burden of congenital and genetic disorders . yet , in many developing countries , the level of genetic services is currently inadequate to meet population needs ; frequently , these services are available only to the wealthy , educated sectors of the community . the provision of genetic services must be weighed responsibly and fairly against the competing health needs in each country . available epidemiological data regarding the prevalence of congenital and genetic disorders , and the cost-effectiveness of control programs , indicates that many developing countries would benefit from incorporating genetic approaches into their health services . while many options for controlling congenital and genetic disorders are cost-effective , they are currently underutilized in most developing countries as means of reducing the burden of disease . in addition , there is also a significant need to develop and expand the collection of further and more detailed epidemiological data . this report has discussed the social context relevant to genetic testing and screening programs in developing countries ; identified the associated primary ethical , legal , and social issues ; and suggested principles for managing these issues effectively . responsibility for translating these principles and recommendations into specific policies , appropriate to the local context , rests with individual governments . the report has not aimed to cover all the ethical aspects of genetic testing and screening but rather to expand and enrich the discussion of some of the major ethical , legal , and social issues specific to developing countries . the report has brought together the increasing empirical evidence relating to the implementation of medical genetic services in developing countries . the primary ethical issues associated with medical genetic services in developing countries are : distributive justice ( access to necessary genetic services is inequitably restricted , usually to the wealthy sectors of the community ) , non-discrimination ( stigmatization of , and discrimination against , people with genetic disorders and carriers of recessive genetic conditions result in direct harm and act as a barrier to genetic services ) , and non-maleficence and beneficence ( appropriate safeguards to ensure quality and safety are lacking when genetic testing occurs outside of recognized genetic services , usually without adequate genetic counseling or informed consent ) . general principles : distributive justice : access to necessary genetic services is inequitably restricted , usually to the wealthy sectors of the community . evidence relating to the cost-effectiveness of medical genetic services should play an important role in health resource prioritization ; however , assumptions used in cost-effectiveness analysis and interpretation of the data generated by such analyses must be balanced against issues of equity and distributive justice . the principles of fair process should be used to ensure public endorsement of difficult decisions about rationing health care and access to medical genetic services . the development of medical genetic services that are both funded and governed publicly is the ideal manner for introducing genetic testing within countries because it promotes equitable access and facilitates regulation and oversight.genetic testing and screening programs should be supported by public education and genetic counseling : participation in all genetic testing and screening programs should be voluntary . properly informed consent is only obtained if the person understands the purpose of the test , including its benefits , risks , and possible outcomes , as well as treatment options and reproductive implications , and decides voluntarily whether to undergo testing , free from official or social pressure . autonomous decision-making regarding the use of medical genetic services depends on the availability of a range of options . optimum genetic testing , screening , and counseling can only occur where there are available and affordable resources for persons with genetic disorders . available , affordable , and safe abortion services for women who voluntarily choose to use this service should be provided . stigmatization of genetic disorders results in direct harm to those affected ; the resulting social harm and actual discrimination ( in marriage , for example ) create indirect barriers to accessing genetic services within the community . such barriers unjustly restrict access to genetic services and therefore reduce the effectiveness of testing and screening programs by limiting their ability to reach the target population . education can be a key tool in minimizing stigmatization , while regulation may be needed to combat discrimination . recommendations : education and dialogue . to ensure that health professionals have an adequate understanding of genetics and genetic services , national governments should require that genetics is a significant component of all medical training , and that health professionals have regular opportunities to access continuing education to update their knowledge about genetics , available medical genetic services , and the relevant ethical , legal , social , and human rights issues . national governments should foster dialogue and cooperation among policymakers , patients and families , clinicians , geneticists , religious leaders , and other stakeholders , to establish and implement genetic services in a manner that is culturally acceptable and maximizes the health benefit to patients . genetic counseling : it is the responsibility of national governments to ensure that genetic testing and screening programs have trained genetic counselors available to provide genetic counseling . due to the significant shortages of genetic counselors in developing countries , short-term courses should be implemented as an interim measure to increase capacity in genetic counseling . these should be directed at existing primary health care workers ( nurses , physicians , geneticists , and other health care personnel providing medical genetic services ) . graduate programs in genetic counseling , though the accepted standard in developed countries , are unlikely to be feasible for many developing countries in the short to medium term . international organizations , in collaboration with civil society and relevant experts , should develop guidelines specifying the minimum skills required for genetic counseling to assist developing countries in designing short-term training in genetic counseling in order to scale up local capacity . patient-support organizations are a valuable resource and support groups should be encouraged to work alongside medical professionals and genetic counselors ; however , support organizations should not be viewed as an alternative to genetic counseling , which involves specialist skills and specific training . discrimination : privacy , confidentiality , and anti-discrimination regulations are necessary measures to protect patients ' rights and safeguard against discrimination and stigmatization on the basis of genetic information . as there is often a discrepancy between law or policy and practice , national governments should guarantee that these regulations have appropriate enforcement mechanisms to ensure that they are put into effect . as regulation and legislation are a necessary component of effective genetic testing and screening services , the international community should provide technical assistance to build capacity , not just in medical genetics but also in public policy and legislative drafting . quality and safety : in order to foster patient well-being and protect patient safety , national governments should establish appropriate quality assurance standards ( addressing analytic validity , clinical validity , and clinical utility ) for genetic tests ; regulations requiring genetic counseling and informed consent for genetic testing and screening ; and appropriate enforcement mechanisms for the above . national governments should ensure that both publicly and privately provided genetic services are governed by appropriate regulations regarding informed consent , genetic counseling , and quality assurance . termination of affected pregnancy : evidence demonstrates that a significant proportion of couples will choose to terminate affected pregnancies . in the absence of safe abortion services , some women will resort to unsafe abortion , thereby exposing themselves to the associated medical , financial , social , and legal risks . national governments should take action to address unsafe abortion , which is a serious threat to women and women 's health . complications arising from unsafe abortion can also result in a significant burden to the public health system . in countries where abortion for fetal abnormalities is restricted or illegal , further debate is required at the academic and policy level regarding the ethical acceptability of introducing prenatal genetic testing in the absence of safe abortion services for medical purposes . patient rights : privacy and confidentiality regulations are necessary to protect patients ' rights and safeguard against potential discrimination and stigmatization . these regulations need effective enforcement mechanisms to ensure that actual practices align with law and policy . the degree to which genetic information differs from other medical information in that national context is a question for national governments to resolve in determining whether specific legislation/regulation is needed on the uses of , and confidentiality requirements for , genetic information . sex selection : the use of medical genetic services for sex determination and selective abortion of fetuses based on their sex for non-medical reasons is a serious problem in some developing countries . legislative prohibitions on this practice have so far proved ineffective . national governments must directly address gender discrimination , son preference , and the social incentives to have male children . national governments of countries where sex selection is a problem should initiate campaigns to promote equal treatment of girls and boys with respect to nutrition , health care , education , employment , inheritance rights , and social , economic , and political activity . abbreviations : achr - advisory committee on health research , aids - acquired immune deficiency syndrome , cea - cost-effectiveness analysis , cedaw - convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women , cf - cystic fibrosis , cfw - cystic fibrosis worldwide , ch - congenital hypothyroidism , cvs - chorionic villus sampling , dna - deoxyribonucleic acid , dmd - duchenne muscular dystrophy , elsi - ethical , legal and social implications , fap - familial adenomatous polyposis , gdp - gross domestic product , hiv - human immunodeficiency virus , hugo - human genome organization , ivf - in vitro fertilization , ngo - nongovernmental organization , nssp - national student screening programme ( kingdom of bahrain ) , oecd - organisation for economic development and cooperation , pgd - pre-implantation genetic diagnosis , pku - phenylketonuria , pnd - prenatal diagnosis , pntn - programa nacional de triagem neonatal ( national newborn screening program , brazil ) , rna - ribonucleic acid , scc - sickle cell club , sus - single health system ( sistema único de saúde , brazil ) , tif - thalassaemia international federation , unesco - united nations educational , scientific and cultural organization , wfh - world federation of haemophilia , who - world health organization . abortion : for the purposes of this report , the terms abortion and termination of pregnancy are used to refer to the deliberate interruption of pregnancy following the detection of fetal abnormality unless otherwise specified . alleles : alternative variants of a gene at the same chromosomal locus . amniocentesis : a test that can be performed after 14 weeks of pregnancy , where a sample of amniotic fluid containing fetal cells is taken from the womb through the abdomen of the mother to enable clinical analysis , which can include chromosomal analysis and/or genetic testing of the fetus . anencephaly : a neural tube defect in the same family of developmental disorders as spina bifida , which occurs when the cephalic or head end of the neural tube fails to close , resulting in the absence of a major portion of the brain , skull , and scalp . the infant is usually blind , deaf , unconscious , and unable to feel pain . although some individuals with anencephaly may be born with a rudimentary brain stem , the lack of a functioning cerebrum permanently rules out the possibility of ever gaining consciousness . reflex actions such as respiration ( breathing ) and responses to sound or touch may occur . aneuploidy : the occurrence of an additional or missing chromosome to give an unbalanced chromosome complement ( for example trisomy 21 , or three copies of chromosome 21 , resulting in down syndrome ) . antenatal : ( see prenatal ) . ashkenazi : a jewish community originating in eastern europe . there are a number of disease alleles that are more prevalent in the ashkenazi jewish population as compared to the general population due to endogamous marriage and founder effect in the small original population ( for example tay sachs disease and brca2-associated breast cancer ) . autosome : any of the 22 pairs of chromosomes that are not classified as sex chromosomes . carrier : a person who carries one allele ( heterozygous ) for a recessive disease and hence is not fully affected by the disease phenotype but can pass the allele on to the next generation . asymptomatic carrier : a carrier who displays none of the symptoms of the disease phenotype . carriers for most recessive diseases are asymptomatic . obligate carrier : when a person is found to be a carrier from family history alone ( for example , a person can be identified as an obligate carrier of an x-linked condition when they have both an affected sibling and an affected child ) . probable carrier : without further pedigree information , parents of affected children are considered probable carriers . carrier testing : the use of a genetic test to identify carriers . chorionic villus sampling : a procedure that can be carried out between 8 to 14 weeks of pregnancy through the vagina or through the abdomen to obtain cells of the chorion ( which will become the placenta ) to enable genetic testing of the fetus . chromosomal disorder : a disorder occurring when there is an additional or missing chromosome or section of chromosome . the genes on the chromosome are not necessarily abnormal ; it is the dosage of those genes that causes the disorder . for example , down syndrome is usually caused by the inheritance of three complete chromosomes 21. chromosomes : dna and protein , organized into distinct molecular structures , located in the nucleus of each cell . humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes . these pairs consist of one chromosome each of paternal and maternal origin . coefficient of inbreeding : the coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) is the probability that an individual with two identical alleles of the same gene received both alleles from a common ancestor . congenital disorder : any potentially pathological condition arising before birth . this includes all disorders caused by environmental , genetic , and unknown factors , whether they are evident at birth or become manifest later in life . consanguineous marriage : a marriage between people who are blood relatives . consanguineous : a genetic relationship defined as descent from at least one common ancestor . cystic fibrosis : a common autosomal recessive hereditary disease in populations of northern european origin ( birth prevalence of 1:3500 ; heterozygote frequency 1:22 ) . the cf gene encodes a membrane-bound protein that regulates a chloride ion channel designated cftr ( cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduction regulator ) . cystic fibrosis is often severe and progressive ; the average life expectancy is currently between 20-30 years . the bronchial system is especially affected . males are almost always infertile , and females are sometimes so . the sweat test is the standard diagnostic test for cf , and a high salt level is indicative of cf . treatment , depending upon the stage of the disease and the organs involved , involves clearing mucus from the lungs by chest physical therapy . diploid : a full set of genetic material , consisting of paired chromosomes , one chromosome from each parental set . most animal cells except the gametes have a diploid set of chromosomes . the diploid human genome has 46 chromosomes . dna : a polymer of subunits in human cells that comprise the genetic code . dna occurs naturally in very long paired strands that form a double helix . a gene is a length of dna that encodes a functional product ( a polypeptide or rna ) . dna microarray : a grid of nucleic acid molecules of known composition linked to a solid substrate , which can be probed with total messenger rna from a cell or tissue to reveal changes in gene expression ( i.e . , the amount of mrna produced ) relative to a control sample . microarray technology , which is also known as dna chip technology , allows the analysis of the expression of many thousands of genes by a single experiment . dominant inheritance : a single allele inherited from one parent , father or mother , is sufficient for phenotypic expression . dominant : an allele is described as dominant if it exerts its phenotypic effect when present in the heterozygous state . duchenne muscular dystrophy : an x-linked disease in which there is gradual wasting and weakening of skeletal muscles , usually affecting boys and causing early death , often before reproductive age . early-onset disorders : disorders that present symptoms between birth and early childhood , generally before reproductive age . endogamous marriage : marriage within the limits of a specific group , clan , tribe , or caste as required by custom or law . epidemiology : the study of the distribution and determinants of health-related states or events in populations and the application of these studies to control health problems . gene expression profile : a determination of the activity of many genes at the same time in a particular tissue , usually measured by the presence of their rna in microarray analysis . gene mutations : structural changes in the dna sequence of a gene resulting from uncorrected errors during dna replication . genes : units of hereditary information that are composed of dna , encode a functional product , and are located on chromosomes . genetic counselling : the process by which individuals or families at risk of a disorder that may be hereditary are advised of the consequences of the disorder , the probability of developing or transmitting it , and the ways in which this may be prevented , avoided , or ameliorated , in a respectful , non-directive , and confidential manner . genetic drift : cumulative changes in gene frequency over successive generations because of chance fluctuations ; this may eventually result in certain alleles being completely lost from a population . genetic test : a laboratory test that analyses a particular configuration of the genetic material , be it ( a ) by direct analysis at the level of a gene or a chromosome or ( b ) by testing a direct gene product ( such as rna , a structural protein , or an enzyme or key metabolite ) . genetic testing : testing offered to people already known to be at increased genetic risk ( e.g . , the partner of a carrier of a haemoglobin disorder , an older pregnant woman , a woman with a fetus with increased nuchal translucency , a biological relative of a person with a genetic condition ) in order to achieve a definitive diagnosis of a genetic condition or state of risk . genetics : the study of heredity , or the transmission of genetic factors from one generation to the next , and of the variation within those factors . genome : with respect to humans , the genome is the sum total of the genetic material present in an individual , including dna present in the chromosomes and that in the mitochondria . genomic epidemiology : the branch of medical science that deals with the study of genes and their functions in relation to the incidence and distribution of disease in a population . genomics : the study of the genome and its action . genotype : the total genetic constitution of an individual . haemoglobin : the molecule in red blood cells that transports oxygen from the lungs to body tissues . haemoglobinopathies : inherited disorders of haemoglobin , including thalassaemia and sickle cell disease , among others . haemophilia : the first major disease recognized as being genetically determined , haemophilia is a classic example of x-chromosomal inheritance , occurring with a frequency of about 1:10 , 000 male newborns . haemophilia a is a hereditary blood disorder characterized by a deficiency of the blood clotting protein factor viii that results in abnormal bleeding . haemophilia b results from a deficiency of factor ix . factor viii ( synthesized mainly in the liver ) is one of the many factors involved in blood coagulation . the severity of haemophilia and the frequency of bleeding depend upon the degree of residual factor viii or factor ix activity . haploid : a single set of chromosomes ( half the full set of genetic material ) , present in the egg and sperm cells of animals . human beings have 23 chromosomes in their reproductive cells . hereditary : the passing of characteristics genetically from one generation to the next , from parent to offspring . heterozygote : a heterozygote has a different allelic form of a specific gene on each of the pair of chromosomes ( often represented as hh ) . homologous chromosomes : a pair of chromosomes in which one member of the pair is obtained from the organism 's maternal parent and the other from the paternal parent ; found in diploid cells . these are also commonly referred to as homologues . homozygote : a homozygote has the same allelic form of a specific gene on each of the pair of chromosomes ( often represented as hh or hh ) . in vitro fertilization ( ivf ) : a laboratory procedure in which eggs and sperm harvested from the parents are combined outside the body resulting in fertilized eggs that can later be replaced in the uterus to complete embryonic and fetal development . with a risk of chromosomal disorders in the offspring , this risk factor is often referred to as advanced maternal age and is generally considered to be over the age of 35 years , when the risk of these disorders begins to increase exponentially . mendelian disorder : disorders that respond to the genetic laws of dominant and recessive inheritance discovered by the monk gregor mendel in peas in the nineteenth century . see monogenic disorder . mitochondria : cellular organelles present in eukaryotic organisms that enable aerobic respiration , which generates the energy to drive cellular processes . each mitochondrion contains a small amount of dna encoding 37 genes . molecular epidemiology : the branch of medical science that deals with the incidence , distribution , and control of disease in a population through identification and characterization of certain molecules and gene sequences . monogenic disorders : see mendelian disorder . multifactorial disorders : disorders whose pathology is dependent on the complex interplay of several genetic and environmental factors . non-disjunction : an error in cell division where the chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis , so that both pass to the same daughter cell . nucleotides : biochemical molecules ( bases ) from which dna and rna molecules are assembled . penetrance : the probability that a genetic trait will be expressed . an allele may have complete or incomplete penetrance . the latter refers to cases where having the particular allele leads to a less than 100 % likelihood of manifesting the phenotype . perinatal : relating to or occurring during the period around childbirth , specifically from around week 28 of pregnancy to around one month after birth . phenotype : the visible properties of an organism produced by its genotype in interaction with the environment ; the clinical presentation of a specific disorder . see genotype . phenylketonuria ( pku ) : an early-onset disease in which the body lacks the enzyme to metabolize dietary phenylalanine to tyrosine , which results in a toxic by-product that causes developmental deficiency , seizures , and tumors . polygenic : involving more than one gene . see multifactorial disorder . polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) : a molecular biology technique developed in the mid-1980s and now one of the most widespread dna technologies , through which specific dna segments may be selectively amplified . polypeptide : a single chain of covalently attached amino acids joined by peptide bonds . polypeptide chains usually fold into a compact , stable form that is part ( or all ) of the final protein . postnatal : occurring immediately or soon after childbirth . predictive testing : see presymptomatic testing . predisposition genetic testing : analysis of a genotype to ascertain whether there is an increased risk of disease . while the genotype alone may be insufficient to cause the disease , impaired expression of alleles and/or environmental factors may be necessary conditions for the disease . pre-implantation genetic diagnosis : genetic testing of embryos created through ivf to identify those at risk of a particular condition . prenatal diagnosis : diagnostic investigations that are performed during fetal development . prenatal : existing or happening during pregnancy but before childbirth . presymptomatic testing : detection of late-onset diseases that develop in adults , identifying either a predisposition to disease or making a definitive diagnosis . protein : biological effector molecules encoded by an organism 's genome . a protein consists of one or more polypeptide chains of amino acid subunits . the functional action of a protein depends on its three-dimensional structure , which is determined by its amino acid composition . recessive inheritance : two abnormal alleles ( if fully penetrant ) must be inherited from each parent for full phenotypic expression in the offspring . recessive : an allele ( if fully penetrant ) is described as recessive if it must be homozygous to confer the full phenotypic effect . see recessive inheritance . screening : the systematic application of a test or inquiry to identify individuals at sufficient risk of a specific disorder , to benefit from further investigation or direct preventive action , among people who have not sought medical attention for the symptoms of that disorder . newborn screening : screening of all newborns in a population for prevalent diseases , including genetic diseases , that can be ameliorated or prevented by treatment from birth or shortly thereafter . carrier screening : isolation of potential carriers from a larger population for further testing and genetic counseling for family planning . genetic screening : a basic test that is systematically offered to a defined population to identify a group at increased genetic risk , which may then be offered further tests that enable a definitive diagnosis . family-based screening : genetic screening offered to relatives of a person identified as carrying a disease-causing gene mutation . when a carrier is detected , further testing is then offered to their relatives . premarital screening : the screening of couples prior to marriage for carrier status for common recessive disorders , which could result in their producing affected offspring . sex chromosome : the pair of chromosomes that determines the sex of an individual ( xx for females and xy for males ) . sex selection : identification and selective termination of pregnancies on the basis of sex , for medical or non-medical purposes . sickle cell disease : an inherited disorder caused by defects in the hemoglobin gene . the disorder produces abnormal hemoglobin , which causes the red blood cells to sickle or become crescent-shaped . the rapid breakdown of sickle-shaped red blood cells causes a decrease in red blood cells ( anemia ) and jaundice . other clinical features include pulmonary hypertension , infections , and periodic episodes of pain caused by oxygen deprivation in tissues . symptoms usually begin in early childhood and can vary from mild to severe . sickle cell anemia affects millions of people worldwide and is most common in africa , the arabian peninsula , and india . sickle cell disease is also frequent in countries where people of african descent live ( such as the united states ) . the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . carrier status also confers some resistance to malaria . sporadic genetic mutation : in terms of genetics , sporadic describes new mutations that cause disease , occurring either in a germ cell or somatic cell of an individual at any stage of life and are therefore not present in the parents . also called de novo mutations . tay-sachs disease : a rare autosomal recessive disorder that causes the accumulation of lipids , resulting in progressive destruction of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord . the most common form begins in infancy . an infant with the disorder appears normal until the age of 3 to 6 months , when development slows , and the baby is often unable to crawl , turn over , or grasp objects . as the disease progresses , infants develop seizures , vision and hearing loss , mental retardation , and paralysis . children with this severe form of tay-sachs disease have a life expectancy of about 14 years . tay-sachs disease is more common in people of ashkenazi jewish heritage . termination of pregnancy : see abortion . thalassaemia : a group of hereditary forms of anemia caused by a reduction in , or lack of , synthesis of the globin chains ( most commonly alpha or beta chains ) that form the red blood pigment hemoglobin . carriers may also show mild hematological symptoms . the condition was first described in mediterranean populations ; however , it is also prevalent in africa , the middle east , and asia . this group of disorders may range from mild blood abnormalities to severe or fatal anemia . adult hemoglobin is composed of two alpha and two polypeptide chains . in alpha-thalassaemia , there is deficient synthesis of alpha-chains . in beta-thalassaemia , there is a defect of beta-chains . currently , severe thalassaemia is treated by blood transfusions , and a minority of patients are cured by bone marrow transplantation . this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . carrier status also confers some resistance to malaria . trisomy 18 ( also edwards syndrome ) : a chromosomal condition that occurs when there are three copies of chromosome 18 in each cell instead of two . trisomy 18 confers an extremely high mortality rate , with about 90-95 % mortality within the first year of life . this condition is characterized by low birth weight , a small , abnormally shaped head , clenched fists with overlapping fingers , mental retardation , heart defects , and other organ malformations . trisomy 18 affects about 1 in 5000 to 6000 live births . approximately 80 % of cases are female . the risk of having a child with trisomy 18 increases with maternal age . trisomy 13 ( also patau syndrome ) : a chromosomal condition that occurs when there are three copies of chromosome 13 instead of two . trisomy 13 is associated with severe mental retardation , small eyes that may exhibit a split in the iris ( coloboma ) , a cleft lip and/or palate , weak muscle tone ( hypotonia ) , an increased risk of heart defects , skeletal abnormalities , and other medical problems . affected individuals rarely live past infancy . trisomy 13 affects approximately 1 in 10,000 live births . the risk of having a child with trisomy 13 increases with maternal age . ultrasound : an imaging method in which high-frequency sound waves are used to outline a part of the body . the sound wave echoes are picked up and displayed on a television screen . this test is used to monitor pregnancy and to identify some congenital disorders . x-linked inheritance : the gene in question is situated on the x chromosome . in the context of disease , the inheritance is normally recessive and leads to disease in boys , since they only have one x chromosome , and there is generally no equivalent gene locus on the y chromosome . women who are carriers have a disease allele on one x chromosome and a normal allele on the other , and so do not usually express the disease . in some cases , however , the carrier may show mild or even severe forms of the disorder . learn about diabetes you can learn how to take care of your diabetes and prevent some of the serious problems diabetes can cause . the more you know , the better you can manage your diabetes . make sure to ask your healthcare team any questions you might have . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . your pancreas an organ , located between your stomach and spine , that helps with digestion releases a hormone it makes , called insulin , into your blood . insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your body 's cells . sometimes your body does n't make enough insulin , or the insulin does n't work the way it should . glucose then stays in your blood and does n't reach your cells . your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . what is prediabetes ? prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . with prediabetes , your chances of getting type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke are higher . with some weight loss and moderate physical activity , you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you can even return to normal glucose levels , possibly without taking any medicines . what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? the signs and symptoms of diabetes are being very thirsty , urinating often , feeling very hungry , feeling very tired , losing weight without trying , sores that heal slowly , dry and itchy skin , feelings of pins and needles in your feet , losing feeling in your feet , blurry eyesight . some people with diabetes don ’ t have any of these signs or symptoms . the only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test . what kind of diabetes do you have ? the three main types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . people can develop diabetes at any age . both women and men can develop diabetes . type 1 diabetes , which used to be called juvenile diabetes , develops most often in young people ; however , type 1 diabetes can also develop in adults . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin because the body 's immune system , which normally protects you from infection by getting rid of bacteria , viruses , and other harmful substances , has attacked , and destroyed the cells that make insulin . treatment for type 1 diabetes includes taking shots , also called injections , of insulin . sometimes taking medicines by mouth . making healthy food choices . being physically active . controlling your blood pressure levels . blood pressure is the force of blood flow inside your blood vessels . controlling your cholesterol levels . cholesterol is a type of fat in your body 's cells , in your blood , and in many foods . type 2 diabetes , which used to be called adult-onset diabetes , can affect people at any age , even children . however , type 2 diabetes develops most often in middle- aged and older people . people who are overweight and inactive are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance a condition that occurs when fat , muscle , and liver cells do not use insulin to carry glucose into the body 's cells to use for energy . as a result , the body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas keeps up with the added demand by making more insulin . over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . if your pancreas can no longer make enough insulin , you will need to treat your type 2 diabetes . treatment for type 2 diabetes includes using diabetes medicines making healthy food choices being physically active controlling your blood pressure levels controlling your cholesterol levels gestational diabetes gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . all women have insulin resistance late in their pregnancy . if the pancreas does n't make enough insulin during pregnancy , a woman develops gestational diabetes . overweight or obese women have a higher chance of gestational diabetes . also , gaining too much weight during pregnancy may increase your likelihood of developing gestational diabetes . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . however , a woman who has had gestational diabetes is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes later in life . babies born to mothers who had gestational diabetes are also more likely to develop obesity and type 2 diabetes . why do you need to take care of your diabetes ? over time , diabetes can lead to serious problems with your blood vessels , heart , nerves , kidneys , mouth , eyes , and feet . these problems can lead to an amputation , which is surgery to remove a damaged toe , foot , or leg , for example . the most serious problem caused by diabetes is heart disease . when you have diabetes , you are more than twice as likely as people without diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke . with diabetes , you may not have the usual signs or symptoms of a heart attack . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your healthcare team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . who is part of your healthcare team ? most people with diabetes get care from primary care providers , such as internists , family physicians , or pediatricians . a team of health care providers can also improve your diabetes care . in addition to a primary care provider , your healthcare team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care a dietitian , a nurse , or a certified diabetes educator expert who can provide information about managing diabetes a counselor or mental health professional a pharmacist a dentist an ophthalmologist or an optometrist for eye care a podiatrist for foot care if diabetes makes you feel sad or angry , or if you have other problems that worry you , you should talk with a counselor or mental health professional . your doctor or certified diabetes educator can help you find a counselor . talk with your doctor about what vaccines and immunizations , or shots , you should get to keep from getting sick . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your healthcare team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . be sure you understand everything you need to know about taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your healthcare team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . take care of your diabetes each day do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . these things may seem like a lot to do at first . just make small changes until these steps become a normal part of your day . follow your healthy eating plan ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . this plan , often called medical nutrition therapy , will include regular monitoring by your dietitian and education about how to adjust your eating habits as the need occurs . medical nutrition therapy is usually covered by insurance or medicare as long as your doctor refers you . your dietitian can help you plan meals that include foods that you and your family like and that are good for you . your healthy eating plan will include breads , cereals , rice , and whole grains fruits and vegetables meat and meat substitutes dairy products healthy fats your plan will also help you learn how to eat the right amount , or portions , of food . making good food choices will help you reach and stay at a healthy weight keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels under control prevent heart and blood vessel disease if you take insulin , look at the white boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . do n't skip meals , especially if you 've already taken your insulin , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . learn more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . eat several small meals during the day instead of big meals . be physically active , physical activity helps you stay healthy . physical activity is especially good if you have diabetes because it helps you reach or stay at a healthy weight . it helps insulin work better to lower your blood glucose levels is good for your heart and lungs gives you more energy even small amounts of physical activity help manage diabetes , such as when you are physically active at work or home . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . not all physical activity has to take place at the same time . increase daily activity by decreasing time spent watching tv or at the computer . children and adolescents should limit screen time not related to school to less than 2 hours a day . limiting screen time can help you meet your physical activity goal . people with diabetes should always talk with a doctor before starting a new physical activity program . do aerobic activities , such as brisk walking , which use the body 's large muscles to make the heartbeat faster . the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head , shoulder , and hip movements . do activities to strengthen muscles and bone , such as sit-ups or lifting weights . aim for two times a week . stretch to increase flexibility , lower stress , and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity . many activities can help your child and your family stay active and have fun . consider activities that they might enjoy and can stick with , such as playing basketball dancing to music with friends taking a walk or a bike ride physical activity helps you stay healthy . action steps if you take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . don ’ t start a physical activity program when your blood glucose levels are high or if you have ketones in your blood or urine . don ’ t be physically active right before you go to bed because it could cause low blood glucose while you sleep . action steps if you do n't take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . ask your doctor about whether you need to eat before you are physically active . when you are being physically active , carry glucose tablets or a carbohydrate-rich snack or drink with you , such as fruit or juice , in case your blood glucose levels go too low . take your medicines as prescribed if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . diabetes medicines most people with type 2 diabetes use medicines other than insulin shots . people with type 2 diabetes use medicine to help their blood glucose levels stay in their target range . if your body makes insulin and the insulin does n't lower your blood glucose levels enough , you may need to take one or more medicines . diabetes medicines come in pill and shot form . some people take diabetes medicines once a day and other medicines more often . ask your healthcare team when you should take your diabetes medicines . sometimes , people who take diabetes medicines may also need insulin shots for a while . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . if you get sick or have surgery , your diabetes medicines may no longer work to lower your blood glucose levels . always check with your doctor before you stop taking your diabetes medicines . insulin shots only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take and which of the following ways to take insulin is best for you : insulin shot . you ’ ll use a needle attached to a syringe a hollow tube with a plunger that you fill with a dose of insulin . some people use an insulin pen , a pen like device with a needle and a cartridge of insulin . never share insulin needles or insulin pens , even with family . insulin pump . an insulin pump is a small device filled with insulin that you wear on your belt or keep in your pocket . the pump connects to a small , plastic tube and a small needle . you or your doctor inserts the needle under your skin . the needle can stay in for several days . insulin jet injector . this device sends a fine spray of insulin through your skin with high-pressure air instead of a needle . insulin injection port . you or your doctor inserts a small tube just beneath your skin , where it remains in place for several days . you can inject insulin into the end of the tube instead of through your skin . only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take . other medicines your doctor may prescribe other medicines to help with problems related to diabetes , such as aspirin for heart health cholesterol-lowering medicines medicines for high blood pressure remembering to take your medicines at the correct times each day can be challenging . many people find that keeping a weekly pill box with separate boxes for each day , and even separate boxes for morning and evening , can help . also ask your healthcare team to update your list of medicines at each visit so you always have an accurate list of what medicines to take and when . check your blood glucose levels checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . if your blood has too much or too little glucose , you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . a member of your healthcare team will show you how to check your blood glucose levels using a blood glucose meter . your healthcare team can teach you how to prick your finger to get a drop of blood for testing . your health insurance or medicare may pay for the blood glucose meter and test strips you need . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check before and after eating , before and after physical activity , before bed , and sometimes in the middle of the night . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . target range for blood glucose levels most people with diabetes should try to keep their blood glucose levels as close as possible to the level of someone who does n't have diabetes . this normal target range is about 70 to 130. the closer to normal your blood glucose levels are , the lower your chance of developing serious health problems . ask your doctor what your target levels are and when you should check your blood glucose levels with a meter . make copies of the chart in the section your diabetes care records to take with you when you visit your doctor . reaching your target range all of the time can be hard . remember , the closer you get to your target range , the better you will feel . the a1c test another test for blood glucose , the a1c also called the hemoglobin a1c test , hb a1c , or glycohemoglobin test is a blood test that reflects the average level of glucose in your blood during the past 2 to 3 months . you should have the a1c test at least twice a year . if your result is not on target , your doctor may have you take the test more often to see if your a1c improves . for the test , your doctor will draw a sample of your blood during an office visit or send you to a lab to have your blood drawn . your a1c test result is given as a percentage . your a1c result plus the record of your blood glucose numbers show whether your blood glucose levels are under control . if your a1c result is too high , you may need to change your diabetes treatment plan . your health care team can help you decide what part of your plan to change . if your a1c result is on target , then your diabetes treatment plan is working . the lower your a1c result , the lower your chance of having diabetes problems . talk with your doctor about what your a1c target should be . your personal target may be above or below the target shown in the chart . a1c targets target for most people with diabetes below 7 percent time to change my diabetes care plan 8 percent or above a1c targets can also depend on how long you have had diabetes whether or not you have other health problems . tests for ketones you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. your body makes ketones when you burn fat instead of glucose for energy . if you have too many ketones , you are more likely to have a serious condition called ketoacidosis . if not treated , ketoacidosis can cause death . signs of ketoacidosis are vomiting weakness fast breathing sweet-smelling breath ketoacidosis is more likely in people with type 1 diabetes . your doctor or diabetes educator will show you how to test for ketones . keep daily records make copies of the daily diabetes record at the end of this booklet . then , write down the results of your blood glucose checks each day . you may also want to record what you ate , how you felt , and whether you were physically active . bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . they can use your records to see whether you need changes in your diabetes medicines or in your healthy eating plan . action steps if you take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take insulin the amount and type of insulin you take what types of physical activity you do and for how long when and what you eat whether you have ketones in your blood or urine when you are sick action steps if you do n't take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take your medicines what types of physical activity you do and for how long learn about high and low blood glucose levels sometimes , no matter how hard you try to keep your blood glucose levels in your target range , they will be too high or too low . blood glucose that too high or too low can make you feel sick . if you try to control your high or low blood glucose and ca n't , you may become even sicker and need help . talk with your doctor to learn how to handle these emergencies . learn about high blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . high blood glucose can happen if you miss taking your diabetes medicines eat too much do n't get enough physical activity have an infection get sick are stressed take medicines that can cause high blood glucose be sure to tell your doctor about other medicines you take . when you 're sick , be sure to check your blood glucose levels and keep taking your diabetes medicines . read more about how to take care of yourself when you 're sick in the section take care of your diabetes during special times or events . signs that your blood glucose levels may be too high are the following : feeling thirsty , feeling weak or tired , headaches , urinating often , having trouble paying attention , blurry vision , yeast infections . very high blood glucose may also make you feel sick to your stomach . if your blood glucose levels are high much of the time , or if you have symptoms of high blood glucose , call your doctor . you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . low blood glucose can come on fast and can be caused by taking too much diabetes medicine missing or delaying a meal being more physically active than usual drinking alcoholic beverages sometimes , medicines you take for other health problems can cause your blood glucose levels to drop . signs your blood glucose levels may be too low are the following : hunger , dizziness or shakiness , confusion , being pale , sweating more , weakness , anxiety or moodiness , headaches , a fast heartbeat . if your blood glucose levels drop lower , you could have severe hypoglycemia , where you pass out or have a seizure . a seizure occurs when cells in the brain release a rush of energy that can cause changes in behavior or muscle contractions . some seizures are life-threatening . if you have any of these symptoms , check your blood glucose levels . if your blood glucose levels are less than 70 , have one of the following right away : three or four glucose tablets one serving of glucose gel the amount equal to 15 grams of carbohydrates 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of fruit juice 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of a regular non-diet soft drink 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of milk five or six pieces of hard candy 1 tablespoon of sugar , syrup , or honey have one of these foods or drinks when your blood glucose levels are low . after 15 minutes , check your blood glucose levels again . repeat these steps until your blood glucose levels are 70 or above . if it will be at least 1 hour before your next meal , eat a snack . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . a glucagon kit has a vial of glucagon , a syringe , and a needle to inject the glucagon . given as a shot , the glucagon quickly raises blood glucose . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you 'll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon kit is not available . action steps if you take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor if you 've passed out from low blood glucose . ask your doctor about glucagon . glucagon is a medicine that raises blood glucose . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . when you have severe hypoglycemia , someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon shot is not available . action steps if you do n't take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor about other medicines you are taking . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicines might cause low blood glucose . tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of day or night , several times in a row . prevent diabetes problems taking care of your diabetes every day will help your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels stay in your target ranges . caring for your diabetes can also help prevent other health problems over the years . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . types of diabetes problems diabetes problems can damage parts of the body such as the heart blood vessels eyes kidneys nerves heart and blood vessel disease can lead to heart attacks and strokes . nerve damage can lead to a loss of feeling in the feet , which may lead to an amputation . you will want to take steps to prevent these diabetes problems . you can learn how to take care of yourself and your diabetes when you 're sick , when you 're at school or work , when you ’ re away from home , when an emergency or a natural disaster happens , or when you ’ re thinking about having a baby or are pregnant . when you 're sick having a cold , the flu , or an infection can raise your blood glucose levels . being sick puts stress on your body . your body releases hormones to deal with the stress and to fight the sickness . higher hormone levels can also cause high blood glucose levels . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . the first step is to talk with your health care team and write down how often to check your blood glucose levels whether you should check for ketones in your blood or urine whether you should change your usual dose of your diabetes medicines what to eat and drink when to call your doctor action steps if you take insulin take your insulin , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . ask your healthcare team about how to adjust your insulin dose based on your blood glucose test results . action steps if you do n't take insulin take your diabetes medicines , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . people who are sick sometimes feel as though they can ’ t eat as much or ca n't keep food down , which can cause low blood glucose levels . consuming carbohydrate-rich drinks or snacks can help prevent low blood glucose . if you are sick , your healthcare team may recommend the following : check your blood glucose levels at least four times a day and write down the results in your record book . keep your results handy so you can report the results to your healthcare team . keep taking your diabetes medicines , even if you ca n't eat . drink at least 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of water or other calorie-free , caffeine-free liquid every hour while you 're awake . if you can ’ t eat your usual food , try eating or drinking any of the following to prevent low blood glucose levels : juice saltine crackers dry toast soup broth or bouillon ice pops or sherbet gelatin that is n't sugar-free milk yogurt soda that is n't sugar-free your doctor may ask that you call right away if your blood glucose levels are above 240 even though you 've taken your diabetes medicines your urine or blood ketone levels are above normal you vomit more than once you have diarrhea for more than 6 hours you have trouble breathing you have a high fever you can ’ t think clearly or you feel more drowsy than usual you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . when you 're at school or work take care of your diabetes when you 're at school or at work : follow your healthy eating plan . take your medicines and check your blood glucose levels as usual . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . keep snacks nearby and carry some with you at all times to treat low blood glucose . if you have trained diabetes staff at your school or work , tell them that you have diabetes . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . when you 're away from home these tips can help you when you ’ re away from home : get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . follow your healthy eating plan as much as possible when you eat out . always carry a snack with you in case you have to wait for a waiter to serve you . limit alcoholic beverages . ask your healthcare team how many alcoholic beverages you can safely drink . eat something when you drink to prevent low blood glucose . if you ’ re taking a long trip by car , check your blood glucose levels before driving . stop and check your blood glucose levels every 2 hours . always carry your diabetes medicines and supplies in the car where you can reach them in case your blood glucose levels drop too low . in case you can ’ t leave for home on time , bring twice the amount of diabetes supplies and medicines you normally need . take comfortable , well-fitting shoes on vacation . you 'll probably be walking more than usual . keep your medical insurance card , emergency phone numbers , and a first aid kit handy . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . if you ’ re going to be away for a long time , ask your doctor for a written prescription for your diabetes medicines and the name of a doctor in the place you ’ re going to visit . don ’ t count on buying extra supplies when you 're traveling , especially if you 're going to another country . different countries use different kinds of diabetes medicines . when you 're flying on a plane these tips can help you when you ’ re flying on a plane : ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines , especially your insulin , if you 're traveling across time zones . take a letter from your doctor stating you have diabetes . the letter should include a list of all the medical supplies and medicines you need on the plane . in the letter , the doctor should also include a list of any devices that shouldn ’ t go through an x-ray machine . carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . if you use an insulin pump , ask airport security to check the device by hand . x-ray machines can damage insulin pumps , whether the pump is on your body or in your luggage . when on a plane , get up from your seat and walk around when possible . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . action steps if you take insulin when you travel , take a special insulated bag to carry your insulin to keep it from freezing or getting too hot bring extra supplies for taking insulin and testing your blood glucose levels in case of loss or breakage ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for taking insulin and testing blood glucose action steps if you don ’ t take insulin when you travel , ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines if you ’ re traveling across time zones carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for testing blood glucose when an emergency or a natural disaster happens everyone with diabetes should be prepared for emergencies and natural disasters , such as power outages or hurricanes . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes , such as a blood glucose meter , lancets , and testing strips your diabetes medicines insulin , syringes , and an insulated bag to keep insulin cool , if you take insulin a glucagon kit if you take insulin or if recommended by your doctor glucose tablets and other food or drinks to treat low blood glucose antibiotic cream or ointment a copy of your medical information , including a list of your conditions , medicines , and recent lab test results a list of your prescription names with dosage information and prescription numbers from your pharmacy phone numbers for the american red cross and other disaster relief groups you also might want to include some food that does n't spoil , such as canned or dried food , along with bottled water . if you 're a woman and planning a pregnancy keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . even before you become pregnant , your blood glucose levels should be close to the normal range . your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you 're already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . you can take steps to bring your blood glucose levels close to normal . your insulin needs may change when you ’ re pregnant . your doctor may want you to take more insulin and check your blood glucose levels more often . if you plan to have a baby , work with your health care team to get your blood glucose levels as close to the normal range as possible see a doctor who has experience taking care of pregnant women with diabetes don ’ t smoke , drink alcoholic beverages , or use harmful drugs follow your healthy eating plan be sure to have your eyes , heart and blood vessels , blood pressure , and kidneys checked . your doctor should also check for nerve damage . pregnancy can make some health problems worse . if you ’ re already pregnant , see your doctor right away . points to remember diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin . type 2 diabetes develops when , over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . people who are overweight and inactive are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your healthcare team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . when you see members of your healthcare team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . ask your healthcare team when you should take your diabetes medicines . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you 'll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . when traveling , carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes in the disaster kit . keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . if you ’ re already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas is unable to produce enough insulin , or when the body cells can not make proper use of the insulin produced , due to reduced sensitivity . diabetes is an important cause for morbidity in malta with around per cent of the population above 18 years estimated to be living with this condition , a proportion of whom are undiagnosed . the incidence in malta is expected to continue rising in all age groups , making diabetes a growing health problem . diabetes has a significant impact on the quality of life of persons with diabetes and their families , especially when complications arise . the high burden of diabetes among the maltese population calls for a national diabetes strategy . the overall aim of this strategy is to emphasize prevention and early diagnosis of diabetes , expand treatment options and further develop the integrated care and management of diabetes so as to prevent or postpone complications . support for persons with diabetes and their families at all stages is considered an important aspect of the service framework being proposed . many of the risk factors leading to type 2 diabetes , which is the common form of diabetes , are modifiable . examples are obesity , unhealthy diet , physical inactivity and smoking . evidence has shown that in the case of diabetes prevention , measures do work and that the onset of diabetes can be prevented or postponed if a healthier lifestyle were to be adopted . prevention strategies require a whole of society approach in order to succeed . a higher level of public awareness about diabetes and measures to avoid type 2 diabetes is necessary . educating the public about diabetes , its risk and seriousness and promoting a healthy lifestyle could potentially avert the projected increase in diabetes incidence . diagnosing diabetes in its early stages or in the so-called pre-diabetic stage may delay the onset of diabetes and is important to reduce the risk of complications . the provision of care for individuals with diabetes involves various professionals . the diabetes clinic at mater dei hospital is the hub for specialist care of persons with diabetes . over the years , a shared care programme has been developed in partnership with the health centres primarily to offer care and support for persons with uncomplicated type 2 diabetes . this strategy proposes to continue to build on the strengths of the existing clinical care programmes whilst seeking to address the gaps that have been identified . in order to attain consistent high quality outcomes the government will continue to invest in trained human resources . this will enable strengthening of the multi-disciplinary team approach particularly in those professions where critical shortages are known to exist . health care professionals will be empowered and equipped to offer care in line with a national service framework . the aim is to ensure that patients receive optimal care in all healthcare settings since it is recognized that the private sector also plays an important role in the care of persons with diabetes . for high standards of care to be achieved , government will increase its investment in innovative treatment using a phased approach . the key emphasis in both children and adults will be primarily geared towards preventing complications through risk factor modification and control . this will be complemented by setting up of screening and follow-up facilitated by the necessary information systems , for the early detection of complications at a stage where they are amendable to effective intervention . patient self-management is a key skill to effectively manage and care for diabetes . it requires patients to understand and know their health condition and to be able to independently control their blood glucose levels . this strategy addresses self-management by placing the patients in the centre of healthcare . it includes actions on patient empowerment , education , health literacy , accessibility of medicines and supplies for self-monitoring . government will work in partnership with ngos to implement stronger patient empowerment . in order to tackle the burden of diabetes effectively , comprehensive and complete information regarding the epidemiology of the disease is necessary . the updated strategic plan is built on the proposal for consultation launched in november . priority initiatives have been identified taking into account the feedback received during the public consultation process . the government is presenting the first ever national strategy for diabetes in line with its electoral programme proposal to bring about improvement in the quality of life for persons with diabetes and their families . chapter 1 : introduction to the national diabetes strategy 2016-2020. what is diabetes ? according to the world health organization ( who ) , 347 million people worldwide have diabetes , and the prevalence is rising faster than expected ( who , 2013 ) . diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that occurs when the body 's response to insulin is diminished , either due to reduced sensitivity to insulin or due to reduced production of insulin . insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas that regulates blood sugar concentration when this rises after a meal or decreases while fasting . large swings in sugar concentration are detrimental to health and lead to both short- and long-term effects . hyperglycemia , or raised blood sugar , may seriously damage body tissues such as the kidneys , nerves , and blood vessels , especially when this has been ongoing for a long time . hypoglycemia or reduced blood sugar causes the brain to cease functioning properly , and unless corrected immediately may lead to coma and eventually death . types of diabetes mellitus . type 1 diabetes : this is caused by the body 's immune system destroying insulin-producing cells in the pancreas . this leads to a reduction in the potential for the body to produce insulin requiring administration of insulin ( injected ) . type 2 diabetes : in this type of diabetes , there is a gradual increase in resistance of the body ’ s tissues to the effects of insulin . there is a more gradual onset than type 1 diabetes ( t1dm ) and is most common in middle-aged and elderly , however , it is becoming more common in younger people too . there are a number of modifiable risk factors for type 2 diabetes ( t2dm ) including obesity , smoking , and inactivity . hence , apart from starting oral hypoglycemic agents , first-line management includes dietary changes and exercise . gestational diabetes : this is the onset of diabetes during pregnancy in an individual with no previously known diabetes but certain risk factors such as obesity and smoking . this is caused by insulin resistance during pregnancy and might herald the onset of t2dm . diabetes in malta : in 2010 , a pilot European health examination survey ( ehes ) was conducted in which blood glucose measurements were taken to estimate the prevalence of diabetes . 9.8 % of the study population ( aged 18 years and over ) were found to have diabetes . the prevalence of elevated blood glucose increased sharply after the age of 40. between the ages of 41 and 60 , 12.2 % of the study sample had elevated blood glucose , while this rose to 21.6 % of the population older than 60 ( directorate for health information and research , 2010 ) . according to the international diabetes federation , 10.1 % of all 20-79 year olds in malta suffer from diabetes . this places malta in the first quartile within the European region . the last population-based prevalence study on diabetes was the Monica study conducted under the auspices of who in 1984. this study had estimated prevalence of diabetes in persons aged 15+ in malta at 7.7 % . the above data , whilst having certain limitations , clearly shows diabetes to be a relatively large and still growing health problem in malta . mortality due to diabetes : in 2013 , the standardized mortality rate due to diabetes was 13 per 100,000 for females , and 19 per 100,000 for males . the average age of death due to diabetes mellitus was 72.2 years in males and 77.9 years in females , compared to the general population 's average age at death of 73.5 years and 79.3 years , respectively ( directorate for health information and research , 2013 ) . diabetes in pregnancy : in 2014 , there were 18 mothers who were reported as being insulin-dependent before their pregnancy , while there were 6 mothers reported with non-insulin-dependent diabetes prior to pregnancy . there was a total of 135 mothers registered with impaired glucose tolerance or gestational diabetes ( directorate of health information and research , 2014 ) . hospital stay : the average length of stay in hospital for diabetes mellitus is the highest in the eu since 2011. in 2014 , it was 14.6 days while the eu average was 8.4 days 2014 ( eurostat , 2015 ) . risk factors for diabetes age since t2dm is commonly diagnosed in middle age and is most prevalent in older people , the changing demographics will have an impact on the prevalence of diabetes . socio-economic factors such as obesity , physical inactivity , unhealthy diet , smoking and poor blood pressure control are all associated with increased risk of developing diabetes . these are more prevalent in individuals suffering from social deprivation and are hence linked ( wilkinson & marmot , 2003 ) . modifiable risk factors : obesity : when compared to eu member states , malta has the highest rate of obesity amongst males and the third highest rate amongst females . 69 % of males and 49.1 % of females were overweight and obese ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . unhealthy diet : the health promotion & disease prevention directorate is in the process of conducting a national food consumption survey which will give a good indication of maltese eating habits . based on previous surveys , the national obesity strategy has six targets for nutrition which include : reducing the frequency of intake of processed meats , sweets , pastries and sugared soft drinks , increasing the intake of fish and vegetables , and reducing the mean daily intake of animal fat ( superintendence of public health , 2012 ) . physical inactivity : the 2002 and 2005 eurobarometer studies on physical activity and health and food respectively report malta as scoring the lowest in a comparison undertaken with the eu-15 ( 2002 ) and eu-25 ( 2005 ) member states for the number of days of moderate and vigorous physical activity , lowest duration of physical activity during the day and lowest average walking time during the week ( eurostat , 2015 ) . smoking : 19.2 % of the maltese population aged 15 or older smoke daily ( euaverage 23.9 % ) . ( department of health information and research , 2008 ; eurostat , 2015 ) in the 2007 european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs study , conducted among form 5 students , 26 % of children reported smoking cigarettes in the previous 30 days . 3.4 % of children have their first cigarette when less than 9 years old and the age at which the highest number of children smoked their first cigarette is 14 years ( european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs , 2007 ) . according to the latest health behaviour in school children study , malta scored third from the top in terms of 13-year-olds who smoke at least once ( 11 % of girls and 9 % of boys ) ( who europe , 2006 ) . Health impact of diabetes general effects on health and well-being diabetes is associated with a variety of other conditions affecting health . in fact , local data from the health interview survey reveals that the age-adjusted means of both the mean health index and the mean vitality index score are significantly lower in people with diabetes when compared to those without ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . another measure of morbidity caused by diabetes is the self -reported need for prescribed medications in diabetics versus non-diabetics , after the diabetic medication itself is excluded . while 55 % of male diabetics are on some prescribed medication , only 35 % of non-diabetics are . this difference is slightly smaller in females but still significant ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . cardiovascular disease : damage to arteries occurs in the presence of prolonged high glucose concentrations . this leads to a variety of cardiovascular diseases such as heart disease , stroke and peripheral vascular disease . people with diabetes have about twice the risk of developing a range of cardiovascular diseases , compared with those without diabetes , and are likely to die due to them . cardiovascular disease is a major cause of death and disability in people with diabetes , accounting for 44 percent of fatalities in people with type 1 diabetes and 52 percent in people with tdm . local data also shows that persons with diabetes have a higher all-cause mortality rate after a myocardial infarction , than persons without diabetes . in addition , people with t2dm have a two-fold increased risk of stroke within the first five years of diagnosis compared with the general population . kidney disease : the damage caused by high blood sugar concentrations also affects small vessels in the kidneys . they start working less efficiently which may eventually result in kidney failure . keeping blood glucose levels as near normal as possible and blood pressure well controlled can greatly reduce the risk of kidney disease developing as well as other diabetes complications . despite this , diabetes is the single most common mellitus is the highest in the eu since 2011. in 2014 , it was 14.6 days while the eu average was 8.4 days 2014. risk factors for diabetes age since t2dm is commonly diagnosed in middle age and is most prevalent in older people , the changing demographics will have an impact on the prevalence of diabetes . socio-economic factors such as obesity , physical inactivity , unhealthy diet , smoking and poor blood pressure control are all associated with increased risk of developing diabetes . these are more prevalent in individuals suffering from social deprivation and are hence linked . modifiable risk factors : obesity : when compared to eu member states , malta has the highest rate of obesity amongst males and the third highest rate amongst females . 69 % of males and 49.1 % of females were overweight and obese . unhealthy diet : the health promotion & disease prevention directorate is in the process of conducting a national food consumption survey which will give a good indication of maltese eating habits . based on previous surveys , the national obesity strategy has six targets for nutrition which include : reducing the frequency of intake of processed meats , sweets , pastries and sugared soft drinks , increasing the intake of fish and vegetables , and reducing the mean daily intake of animal fat ( superintendence of public health , 2012 ) . physical inactivity : the 2002 and 2005 eurobarometer studies on physical activity and health and food respectively report malta as scoring the lowest in a comparison undertaken with the eu-15 ( 2002 ) and eu-25 ( 2005 ) member states for the number of days of moderate and vigorous physical activity , lowest duration of physical activity during the day and lowest average walking time during the week ( eurostat , 2015 ) . smoking : 19.2 % of the maltese population aged 15 or older smoke daily ( euaverage 23.9 % ) . ( department of health information and research , 2008 ; eurostat , 2015 ) in the 2007 european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs study , conducted among form 5 students , 26 % of children reported smoking cigarettes in the previous 30 days . 3.4 % of children have their first cigarette when less than 9 years old and the age at which the highest number of children smoked their first cigarette is 14 years ( european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs , 2007 ) . according to the latest health behaviour in school children study , malta scored third from the top in terms of 13-year-olds who smoke at least once ( 11 % of girls and 9 % of boys ) ( who europe , 2006 ) . health impact of diabetes general effects on health and well-being diabetes is associated with a variety of other conditions affecting health . in fact , local data from the health interview survey reveals that the age-adjusted means of both the mean health index and the mean vitality index score are significantly lower in people with diabetes when compared to those without ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . another measure of morbidity caused by diabetes is the self -reported need for prescribed medications in diabetics versus non-diabetics , after the diabetic medication itself is excluded . while 55 % of male diabetics are on some prescribed medication , only 35 % of non-diabetics are . this difference is slightly smaller in females but still significant ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . cardiovascular disease : damage to arteries occurs in the presence of prolonged high glucose concentrations . this leads to a variety of cardiovascular diseases such as heart disease , stroke and peripheral vascular disease . people with diabetes have about twice the risk of developing a range of cardiovascular diseases , compared with those without diabetes , and are likely to die due to them . cardiovascular disease is a major cause of death and disability in people with diabetes , accounting for 44 percent of fatalities in people with type 1 diabetes and 52 percent in people with tdm . local data also shows that persons with diabetes have a higher all-cause mortality rate after a myocardial infarction , than persons without diabetes . in addition , people with t2dm have a two-fold increased risk of stroke within the first five years of diagnosis compared with the general population . kidney disease : the damage caused by high blood sugar concentrations also affects small vessels in the kidneys . they start working less efficiently which may eventually result in kidney failure . keeping blood glucose levels as near normal as possible and blood pressure well controlled can greatly reduce the risk of kidney disease developing as well as other diabetes complications . despite this , diabetes is the single most common cause of end-stage renal disease , and around one in three people with t2dm eventually develops overt kidney disease . kidney disease is the second most common cause of death in diabetics , accounting for 21 percent of deaths in t1dm and 11 percent of deaths in t2dm . eye disease : blood vessels in the retina of the eye can also be damaged . this leads to compromised vision and may even lead to blindness if untreated ( retinopathy ) . within 20 years of diagnosis , nearly all people with t1dm and almost two-thirds of people with t2dm ( 60 percent ) have some degree of retinopathy , and people with diabetes are 10 to 20 times more likely to go blind than people without diabetes . people with diabetes are also twice as likely to suffer from cataracts or glaucoma as the general population . the health interview survey in 2008 asked respondents to state whether they could recognize a face 4 meters away or read a newspaper as a measure of short/long-sightedness respectively . diabetic subjects were found to be more likely to report having a lot of difficulty or even being completely unable to do so than non-diabetics ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) ( p= < 0.05 ) . amputation : the biggest cause of amputations in persons with diabetes is due to peripheral artery disease . worldwide , the rate of leg amputations in people with diabetes is over 15 times higher than in people without diabetes . it is a cause of great morbidity and also a risk factor for premature death since up to 70 percent of people die within five years of having an amputation as a result of diabetes . in malta , 74 % of persons who suffer a major amputation have diabetes ( amputee database 2015 ) . mental health : emotional health and wellbeing can be affected by coping with diabetes and as a side effect of some medication . the prevalence of depression is approximately twice as high in people with diabetes as it is in the general population . locally , people with diabetes are more likely to report symptoms of chronic anxiety or depression when compared to non-diabetics ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . neuropathy : due to the damage to nerves that diabetes causes , some patients suffer from chronic nerve pain . neuropathies ( or nerve damage ) may affect up to 50 per cent of patients with diabetes , which may lead to charcot deformities that impact greatly on the quality of life . the same neuropathy can result in erectile dysfunction . the reported prevalence of erectile dysfunction is between 35 percent and 90 percent among men with diabetes . oral health : current evidence shows that there is a bi-directional relationship between diabetes and periodontal disease and that periodontitis may be associated with increasing glycaemia in people who do not have diabetes . type 2 diabetes is itself a risk factor for periodontitis . complications in pregnancy : a fetus of a pregnant mother who is also a diabetic or develops diabetes during pregnancy is at greater risk for complications such as macrosomia ( excessive birth-weight ) which may lead to complications during labor , neonatal hypoglycemia , and stillbirth . uncontrolled or unrecognized diabetes in early pregnancy can also lead to congenital malformations and miscarriages . projections ( future health profile ) : according to the latest projections by the international diabetes federation , the local prevalence of diabetes is expected to rise unless drastic action is undertaken to address this . the rise in prevalence together with maltas changing demographics also means that maltese diabetics will get older and hence more prone to morbidity ( international diabetes federation , 2013 ) . there are three categories of costs associated with diabetes : direct costs : diabetes is costly for the healthcare systems because of its chronic nature and particularly because of the gravity of its complications . indirect costs : diabetes causes a loss of productivity because of disability . sick leave , early retirement and premature death . These costs are borne both by firms and by insurance companies . indirect costs are often higher than direct costs . intangible costs : diabetes influences the quality of life of patients ( suffering , anxiety , and discrimination sometimes ) . it can also affect their social life and their leisure time . Their mobility can also be reduced because of the disease . diabetes complications require hospitalization most of the time . 50 % of people with diabetes suffer from at least one complication . hospitalization represents the biggest proportion of the direct costs . It implies admission to hospital , laboratory analysis , the work of medical staff , specific therapies , and investments to assure the best quality of care for affected people . the length and the frequency of this hospitalization also increase the costs on health systems . by contrast , drug costs ( insulin , anti-diabetic drugs ) to treat t2dm are relatively low . in conclusion , diabetes complications represent a huge cost for healthcare systems . local costs : in malta , the annual excess cost for hospital , primary care and specialist visits for persons with diabetes versus those without diabetes has been calculated using ehis 2008 data . it is estimated to be at least 9 million , the bulk of which is due to more frequent and longer inpatient stays . the rationale for a national diabetes strategy for malta : diabetes is an important cause of morbidity in the maltese population . its incidence is rising in all age groups . diabetes has a significant impact on the quality of life of the individuals affected as well as their families . furthermore , diabetes is an economic burden to society . some types of diabetes are preventable . prevention strategies require a whole of society approach as is proposed in the who health policy health 2020. persons with diabetes have the potential to lead an active and fulfilled life . the support from society in terms of provision of high-quality health care that is free at the point of use as well as removal of barriers for engagement in work and leisure activities are important aspects of any diabetes strategy . the high prevalence of diabetes in malta warrants a national strategy . whilst acknowledging and building upon the existing strengths , a national strategy allows us to focus on the gaps and propose measures to address them . this will ensure coordinated action from health authorities , health care providers , health care professionals , patients and civil society in order to bring about a coordinated and consistent approach to diabetes prevention and care in malta . in november 2014 , government published a draft strategy as a proposal for consultation . following the feedback obtained during the public consultation process as well as the consultation that took place through the parliamentary working group on diabetes , government has selected the priority initiatives for implementation over the next five years . these measures need to be implemented in partnership with all of society . this document largely builds upon the proposal issued in november 2014 since the feedback received during the consultation process indicated that there is a broad consensus on the proposed areas for action . this first-ever national diabetes strategy for malta forms part of a series of health policies geared towards reduction of the burden of chronic non-communicable disease in society within the overarching framework of the national health systems strategy . Provision of clinical services for diabetes : all adult persons with diabetes irrespective of the aetiology and classification of their diabetes have access to specialist care provided within the diabetes clinic at mater dei hospital . this clinic has been established for several decades previously at st. lukes hospital and has been the reference point for all health care professionals and patients with regards to diabetes care offering services in line with international recommendations and standards for the management of patients with diabetes . services are provided by specialized doctors , nurses , and allied health professionals both on an outpatient and inpatient basis . adults with t1dm , gestational diabetes , maturity onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) and other rare types of diabetes as well as persons with complications from t2dm are all seen within the specialist clinics at mater dei hospital since this is the appropriate clinical setting to care for these conditions . children with diabetes are seen by a consultant pediatrician and endocrinologist at the children 's outpatients . when complications develop , other professionals are involved in the care of the person with diabetes depending on the nature of the complication . ophthalmologists , renal physicians , vascular surgeons , cardiologists , physiotherapists , occupational therapists , podiatrists , and tissue viability nurses are key in the care of persons with diabetes who develop complications . over the past few years in order to meet the increasing demand as the prevalence of diabetes increases as a result of the demographic transition and other factors , as well as to devolve management as much as possible towards a primary care setting , a shared care diabetes program has been developed between mater dei hospital as the specialist referral centre for all adult persons with diabetes and the health centres in primary care . in this shared care programme , primarily patients with uncomplicated t2dm are seen by a general practitioner ( gp ) with a special clinical interest in primary care . patients are also seen at prescribed time intervals by the specialist in diabetes and fast-track referral scheme are in place to allow patients to be seen in between scheduled specialist appointments should the necessity arise . services to prevent eye complications through preventive retinal photography have been in place in a hospital setting for several years . more recently fundoscopy cameras have also been installed in the community . likewise , podiatrists offer foot screening , examination and management in both the hospital and community settings . currently , persons with diabetes in malta can choose to be managed either through the public health sector or through the private sector . in the private sector patients are managed by their private gp or by their private diabetes specialist through a system of professional referral as the need arises . the significant contribution of private primary care in the maltese health care system means that for a number of patients private primary care providers play a key role in the care of persons with diabetes . in many cases , a combination of service providers may be responsible for care of persons with diabetes across hospital and primary care and across public and private settings . all persons with diabetes are also encouraged to attend structured diabetes education sessions carried out by diabetes nurses , doctors , dietitian s and podiatrists . sometimes referral for psychological review is also required . seamless communication and coordination of all aspects of patient care therefore represent a particular challenge in the management of diabetes which requires the specialized input of several health care professionals . the diabetes clinics in health centres are mostly run by family doctors with a special interest and training in diabetes . the number of attendances has been steadily increasing over the years . persons with diabetes are seen in a holistic manner , and a number of routine investigations and examinations are performed at least every 6 months . persons with diabetes are referred to the clinics by referral from family doctors in the community ( both public and private ) , and also from mater dei hospital . chapter3 : prevention and early diagnosis of type2 diabetes . epidemiological studies have shown that the maltese population has a relatively high prevalence of carbohydrate metabolism disorders in persons over 15 years . this higher prevalence is corroborated by increased rates of maltese pregnant women with an impaired glucose metabolism . it is well established that these women are at an increased risk of development of t2dm or impaired glucose tolerance later on in life . persons are diagnosed as having diabetes according to blood glucose levels set at the threshold at which they are at an increased risk of developing microvascular , cardiovascular complications and premature mortality 2. the situation is unfortunately not as simple as this , there is a grey area where they may be hyperglycaemic above the normal ranges but below the threshold classifying diabetes . this category of people are often termed pre-diabetics and are at increased risk of developing diabetes and its complications . the major drivers for t2dm are modifiable risk factors such as high rates of overweight and obesity in adults and children . an integrated approach to tackling chronic diseases is the way forward . this is based on the fact that there are common risk factors and co-existence of a number of chronic diseases in a person . in europe it was estimated that 35 % of men over the age of 60 years will have two or more chronic diseases contemporaneously . an integrated , patient-centred approach to prevention will cut costs over managing the patient for each condition separately capitalizing on scarce resources and having a greater impact on the individuals health . at the same time care needs to be taken to focus on diabetes prevention on those persons deemed to be at high risk of developing this disease . modifiable risk factors for developing diabetes . overweight or obesity : excess weight is widely acknowledged to independently increase the risk of developing diabetes . the magnitude of this association has been widely investigated and various strengths of association have been quoted . there is general consensus that at a body mass index ( bmi ) of 23kg/m2 there is no additional risk of developing diabetes attributable to weight . particularly above a bmi of 29kg/m2 the risks are markedly increased whilst with a bmi of 25-29kg/m2 persons were found to have twice the risk of those with a bmi of 23kg/m2 . excess weight earlier on in life was also found to be associated with an increased diabetic risk . a meta-analysis of well-powered studies of this association have found that when adjusting for the three main confounding variables ( age , family history of t2dm and physical activity ) , the relative risk of developing diabetes was 7.28 for obese persons and 2.92 for overweight persons . furthermore , wald et al . designed an algorithm to determine the percentage body weight loss that was found to neutralize ones excess diabetic risk related to weight . A 10 % reduction in weight would approximately half the risk of developing diabetes whereas a 20 % reduction in body weight would decrease this risk by approximately three quarters . the bmi level at which the risk for diabetes is least is 22kg/m2 . there is thus significant public health impact of adequate weight control at a population level as regards the diabetic risk . physical inactivity a number of large cohort studies provide strong evidence for the value of physical activity in reducing the incidence of t2dm . although we know that physical inactivity is an independent risk factor for diabetes , the exact values are specific to the study population . in the usa it was estimated that 13 % of t2dm in men and 29 % of t2dm in women was attributable to lack of physical activity whilst in finland this ranges from 3 % to 7 % . although both obesity and the lack of physical activity were found to be independent risk factors for diabetes , the former was found to confer the larger risk . physical activity in itself results in lower rates of obesity and therefore the role of physical activity in preventing diabetes should not be underestimated . gestational diabetes it is well established that women who have experienced gestational impaired carbohydrate metabolism disorders such as gestational impaired glucose tolerance and gestational diabetes ( gdm ) are at an increased risk of developing t2dm later on in life . a local eight year follow up cross sectional study has shown the risk for women with gigt/gdm was 3.6-6.7 times higher than for the general population . factors that were shown to increase the risk of progression to prediabetes and also to t2dm included weight gain and increased waist circumference post-partum . targeting women with elevated fasting glucose levels during pregnancy may prove to have the greatest effect for the effort required . this is a golden opportunity to target effective lifestyle interventions amongst this high-risk group . one must not forget that the offspring of these women are also considered to be at an increased diabetic risk due to the altered milieu interieur to which they were exposed . therefore , establishing healthy attitudes will benefit both the mother and the child . tobacco three large prospective studies suggest that smoking is associated with the development of t2dm in men and women consistent with evidence linking smoking and insulin resistance . in a study on middle-aged british men , the risk of t2dm was significantly increased in cigarette smokers compared with never-smokers , despite their lower body weight . the relationship was stronger after adjustment for bmi and persisted after additional adjustment for other potential confounders . sufficient evidence exists to indicate that cigarette smoking is an independent and modifiable risk factor for t2dm . high blood glucose ( prediabetes ) high blood glucose is a substantial risk factor for diabetes and in the long run , heart disease and stroke . impaired fasting glucose ( ifg ) and impaired glucose tolerance ( igt ) are two states of abnormal glucose metabolism that are collectively known as prediabetes . current estimates are that up to 70 % of persons with ifg/igtmay progress to diabetes . in persons with diabetes , cardiovascular risk increases in a linear fashion with hyperglycaemia . the whitehall study showed a definite graded relationship between increasing levels of hyperglycaemia above a threshold level and coronary mortality . metabolic syndrome abdominal obesity may be associated with clustering of cardiovascular and metabolic risk factors which constitute the metabolic syndrome . this includes hypertriglyceridemia , low high-density lipoprotein and cholesterol levels , high blood pressure , and elevated levels of fasting glucose . patients with even minimal abnormalities in any 3 of the 5 risk factors for the metabolic syndrome are at heightened risk for developing cvd or diabetes . the risk for disease increases over time as the number of metabolic syndrome characteristics accumulates and hence early management is warranted . evidence for preventing the onset of diabetes as outlined below , there is robust evidence that in the case of diabetes , prevention does work . evidence exists for the effectiveness and benefits of diabetes prevention , earlier diagnosis and better care of the diagnosed patient . numerous studies have shown how lifestyle intervention when applied consistently in the form of dietary advice and or the introduction of sustained physical activity to a population of high-risk individuals , results in the delay or actual prevention of t2 dm . one of the earliest studies in this regard is known as the malmo study . middle aged men with normal glucose tolerance and others who were known to have impaired glucose tolerance at baseline were assigned to continue as usual whilst others were prescribed a lifestyle intervention composed of six months of supervised physical training and dietary treatment . this study showed a lower incidence of t2dm amongst the group who had undergone the lifestyle intervention with an increased reversal of impaired glucose tolerance to normal levels . mortality at 12 years follow up was also found to be better for this latter group . the da qing study period , in contrast , lasted for 6 years and this attempted to determine the relative effect of either a dietary intervention or an intervention involving increased physical activity on the development of diabetes . they found that diet reduced the incidence by 31 % , exercise by 46 % and a combination of both resulted in a reduction of 42 % . the finnish diabetes prevention study ( dps ) was the first randomized control trial that studied the effect of lifestyle intervention of a group of obese or overweight participants with impaired glucose tolerance at baseline . after two years of this trial , it was concluded that the intervention group had less than half the risk of developing diabetes as compared to the non-intervention group . this impact of the lifestyle change was found to persist for at least four years after the intervention was terminated . this cumulative attenuation of the individual ’ s risk was seen with the achievement of each health promoting goal including weight loss , increased physical activity , increased dietary fiber and decreased intake of total and saturated fats . the diabetes prevention program ( dpp ) is another larger randomized clinical trial in which individuals of various ethnicities and of diverse cohorts were randomized to one of three intervention groups . one included placebo treatment , one included treatment with metformin whilst the latter was a lifestyle intervention group . the participants of the intensive lifestyle intervention group were required to lose at least 7 % of their initial body weight through a healthy diet and 150 minutes of moderate in tensity physical activity per week . individualized , targeted sessions were delivered through a carefully organized , standard curriculum . the results were clear - the group that was assigned the intensive lifestyle modification program had a 58 % less risk of developing diabetes as compared to the placebo group . it is important that lifestyle interventions are patient centered rather than the one -size-fits-all approach and they must also be culturally adapted to the context within which they are to be used . studies have shown that interventions advocating an improvement in diet alone or an increase physical activity alone or a combination of the two have been found to be equally effective . objectives increase awareness and literacy about diabetes decrease the risk of t2dm by targeting the modifiable risk factors including : overweight and obesity , physical inactivity , smoking , dyslipidaemia and hypertension , particularly in high -risk groups improve the health outcomes of people with diabetes through early diagnosis , improved self-management and lifestyle modification guiding principles adopt a whole of society and whole of government approach diabetes is largely caused by the way we live and work . it is not caused by the health system and can not be solved by the health system alone . lifestyle choices are strongly influenced by trade , marketing , fiscal policies , education , transport and urban environment , media and agricultural practices . the whole of society and whole of government approach should underpin effective strategies to prevent the onset of risk factors related to diabetes and to improve the health outcomes of diabetes . this approach underpins both the noncommunicable disease strategy and the healthy weight for life strategy . in order to be effective , actions resulting from the diabetes plan must include intersectoral action and be congruent with actions resulting from the ncd and hwl strategies . life course approach the risk causes of noncommunicable diseases including diabetes accumulate throughout life , starting from in utero through childhood and adolescence , adulthood into old age . the main factors at different stages of life include : foetal life foetal growth , maternal nutritional status and socio-economic position at birth infancy and childhood breastfeeding , unhealthy diet , lack of physical activity , obesity , socio-economic position adolescence unhealthy diet , lack of physical activity , obesity , alcohol and tobacco use adult known behavioural and biological risk factors evidence is accumulating that effective policies addressing these risks can prevent ncds . the risk of developing diabetes is influenced by biological or social factors acting at all stages of the life course , including the exposure to gestational maternal diabetes and high birth weight . obesity , high blood pressure and dyslipidaemia track from childhood through adolescence and young adulthood , leading to atherosclerosis and in many cases diabetes . focus on equity equity is the absence of avoidable or remediable differences among groups of people , whether those groups are defined socially , economically , demographically , or geographically . health inequity encompasses both health determinants and access to resources to maintain or improve health outcomes . the determinants of health affect people ’ s opportunities to make and sustain healthy choices , including their ability to choose healthier diets and undertake regular physical activity , and their capability of maximizing health outcomes while living with diabetes . strategies for diabetes prevention will aim to contribute towards the reduction of health inequalities by reaching out to vulnerable and hard to reach groups . National strategies working in synergy to prevent diabetes several public health strategies published over the past years focus on reducing the prevalence of risk factors relating to diabetes . some of the actions aimed at reducing the prevalence of t2dm and its complications in the general population include the provision of education on healthier lifestyles , the promotion of healthy diets in schools and the lowering of the prevalence of excess weight especially in those with a history of first degree relatives with t2 dm . the strategy for the prevention and control of non -communicable diseases ( ncd ) also focuses on secondary prevention to ensure the reduction of excessive weight in persons with diabetes and lifestyle modification , to improve the level of education and self-management in persons with diabetes and to encourage exercise among these persons . it promotes the role of primary care teams in providing primary and secondary prevention ( health promotion and disease prevention directorate , 2010 ) . the food and nutrition policy and action plan ( 2014 ) identifies nutrition as a major modifiable determinant of chronic disease . this action plan takes population based approaches and individual targeted interventions through collaborative health-in-all policies and whole-of-government approach involving all levels of government and relevant stakeholders ( health promotion and disease prevention directorate , 2014 ) . the healthy weight for life ( hwl ) strategy points out that overweight and obesity are responsible for about 80 % of cases of t2dm . this strategy focuses on action related to nutrition and physical activity across the life course and within different settings . it requires a whole of government and whole of society approach in order to achieve effective actions and to reach its targets by 2020 ( superintendence of public health , 2012 ) . in additional other strategies focusing on policy strengthening the sports culture within the population , including increasing access to high quality sports facilities have also resulted in new opportunities for physical activity for different age groups in localities all over both islands ( malta sports council , 2006 ) . the healthy eating lifestyle plan regulates food and drink consumed on school premises including during special activities and those provided from school tuck shops . it promotes the concept of the health promoting school by giving guidelines on both nutrition and physical activity and encouraging the integration of the school as a health resource within the wider community ( ministry for education and employment , 2014 ) . the breastfeeding policy builds on previous work done to make breastfeeding the cultural norm , by involving the whole family , health professionals , employers , educators and retailers to encourage exclusive breastfeeding till six months and as long as both mother and child wish to continue thereafter . actions increase awareness and literacy a bout diabetes this objective needs to be tackled at various levels . results from a recent survey on health literacy in the general population indicate that there is a need to implement a programme to improve health literacy particularly amongst certain population groups . awareness and health literacy about diabetes should be implemented at population level , amongst individuals who are known to be at higher risk of developing t2dm , amongst individual who are newly diagnosed with diabetes and amongst health care professionals . these programmes will be undertaken in partnership with professional associations and with ngos through the following actions . implementation of an integrated social marketing programme which provides strong messages about the risks , seriousness and impact of t2dm and focuses on the preventability of the condition . development and implementation of a specific health literacy programme for persons with diabetes provision or education and support for staff in schools in identifying and dealing with diabetes emergencies design and delivery of an interactive it based continuing professional development programme on prevention and management of diabetes for all health care workers tailored to their specific needs and levels of education interventions for individuals at high risk of type 2 diabetes by targeting modifiable risk factors besides the work carried out at population level , certain groups are known to have an increased risk of developing t2dm . one easily identifiable group deserving close monitoring and support is women who develop gestational diabetes . therefore , it is foreseen that specific outreach support programmes will be developed for these women at higher risk . other persons deemed at risk will be referred for lifestyle modification support programmes offered through the directorate for health promotion . the following actions will be implemented . development of formalized post-partum follow-up and prevention programmes for women with gestational diabetes referral of persons deemed at high-risk of developing t2dm for smoking cessation or weight management programmes as appropriate improve the health outcomes of persons with type 2 diabetes through early diagnosis , improved self-management and lifestyle modification diabetes is often asymptomatic in its early stages . yet appropriate management and glycaemic control at the outset serve to postpone complications and improve quality of life . besides the obvious benefits of avoiding or postponing complications for the affected individuals and their families , several studies have shown economic and societal benefit through the implementation of programmes which promote early diagnosis . earlier diagnosis consists of identifying high risk individuals and offering them appropriate diagnostic tests . the best consensus appears to indicate that whilst population-based screening is not justified in terms of numbers needed to screen , there is value in implementing clinical opportunistic screening for the condition . studies tend to agree that screening should be targeted towards high-risk individuals . the most consistent factors that predict the likelihood of diabetes are the following and persons with any of the following characteristics should be screened using fasting venous blood glucose as the screening test for igr and t2dm . obesity ( bmi > 30 kg/m2 ) family history ( first degree relative ) raised blood pressure ( systolic > 130 mm hg ) and /or heart disease previous occurrence of diabetes in pregnancy use of drugs that predispose a patient to t2dm , including : nicotinic acid ; glucocorticoids ; thyroid hormone ; beta-adrenergic antagonists ; thiazides ; phenytoin ; pentamidine ; anti-psychotic a gents ; interferon-alpha therapy . all health care professionals who encounter persons who have at least one of these risk factors are encouraged to ask about screening for diabetes in the past 12 months and to refer persons for opportunistic screening . improving health literacy for people with diabetes will focus on improving their knowledge , skills and confidence , enabling them to take increasing control of their own condition and integrate effective self-management into their daily lives . high-quality structured and sustained educational programmes can have a beneficial effect on health outcomes and can significantly improve quality of life . successful outcomes in diabetes depend to a great extent on the role patients plan in managing their condition on a daily basis . at the initial stages of diagnosis , it is fairly common for patients to pass through the recognized stages of grief for the loss of health . at the same time during this initial stage patients have to learn about their condition , lifestyle changes , medicines , self-monitoring , management and avoidance of complications . it is the duty of every health care professional seeing diabetic patients including doctors , nurses , pharmacists , podiatrists , dietitians to provide patients education and counselling during clinical encounters . furthermore , structured patient education , particularly at the time of diagnosis or treatment transition , is also needed . education needs to be reinforced at regular intervals . the current programme is primarily administered by diabetes specialist nurses . however , it is recognised that further efforts need to be carried out to tailor education on self - management according to the persons level of health literacy . low levels of uptake of the programme have been identified and , therefore , use of modern communications media should be considered as an alternative to ensure the delivery of the key messages as well as specific outreach . the education programme should be delivered by all members of the multidisciplinary team covering different topics . the provision of education should be based on adult learning principles that promote active learning ideally provided within a group format , unless this is considered inappropriate . structured programmes should be provided by appropriately trained multidisciplinary teams including , as a minimum , a dietitian and a diabetes specialist nurse ( or practice nurse experienced in diabetes ) who understand the principles of patient education . this is complementary to one-to-one patient education undertaken by health care professionals attending to patients with diabetes ; doctors are particularly encouraged to ensure that their patients are appropriate literate about their diabetes during clinical encounters . dietary care planning and diabetes nutrition management is fundamental for the prevention of t2dm and the effective management of all types of diabetes . newly diagnosed diabetics should be provided with a tailored and individualized dietary care plan based on the latest evidence of effectiveness . people taking hypoglycaemic drugs and insulin will need further advice on dietary management to balance their food intake and physical activity levels with their medication . dietary changes need to be agreed at a pace suited to the individual regular follow up appointments are recommended in the initial stages after diagnosis or at times of transition , such as when medication is changed . people with diabetes who present with possible eating disorders ( e.g . bingeing etc . ) should be referred to a clinical psychologist and dietitian for a joint programme of care . patients need regular updating , and it has been shown that when patients accept their condition they are more receptive to educational interventions . it is , therefore , important that all patients with t2dm as well as those with t1dm receive regular educational session on diabetes management and control through the course of their disease . such sessions also serve as an opportunity for patients to ask for advice and to identify persons who may require additional support from dietetic or psychological services . educational material will be prepared using different media to reinforce the importance of self-management for persons with diabetes . lifestyle modification should become standard management for all newly diagnosed persons with type 2 diabetes . self-management will focus specifically on smoking cessation , weight management , optimal glycaemic control , control of hypertension , dyslipidaemia and regular screening for heart , eye , kidney and foot complications ( health promotion and disease prevention directorate , 2010 ) . therefore the following actions are foreseen : implementation of a clinical opportunistic screening programme to decrease the rate of undiagnosed diabetes in partnership with gps , outpatient clinics , pharmacies , dental clinics referral of newly diagnosed persons with diabetes to smoking cessation and weight management programmes health literacy sessions for persons with type 2 diabetes specifically focused on self-management chapter4 : improving access to innovative quality treatment introduction defining access to medicines and devices for diabetes the cost of ensuring access to diabetes medicines and devices should be considered as an investment by all of society to alleviate the human and financial burden of poorly controlled diabetes and its complications . the social and indirect costs ( such as the loss of productivity due to illness ) of diabetes -related complications may be even greater than their direct cost to health systems ( international diabetes federation europe , 2011 ) . government through this strategy is determined to make access to diabetes care be seen as an investment to promote a healthier and more productive society and is a contributor to long-term economic growth . however , ensuring access to diabetes treatment is a costly , complex and resource-consuming challenge . it is nonetheless acknowledged that through the needs assessment and consultation process a general consensus emerged that this aspect of diabetes care in malta is an important priority to be urgently addressed even though it must not be forgotten that this is also only one element in high-quality comprehensive diabetes care ( international diabetes federation europe , 2011 ) . in addressing the goal of improving access to innovative quality treatment , the strategy sets out the following objective : to implement a plan of expansion of the government formulary for diabetes in order to provide access to those innovative treatments which have been shown to improve health outcomes and quality of life in persons with diabetes whilst giving due attention to the impact of such expansion on the overall financial sustainability of our health system to improve access to devices that promote self-monitoring and self -management of diabetes in order to encourage patient participation in the management of their condition and foster an outcome oriented and preventive culture guidelines for the treatment of diabetes mellitus type 1dm t1dm is characterized by a complete deficiency of insulin production . without a regular and reliable supply of insulin , people with t1dm will not survive ( international diabetes federation europe , 2011 ) . an intensified insulin regimen is required in these patients consisting of both basal and prandial insulin . insulins may be divided into the following classes : conventional human insulins : intermediate-acting ( basal ) e.g . isophane insulin short-acting ( prandial ) e.g . soluble insulin- insulin analogues : long-acting ( basal ) e.g . degludec , detemir and glargine rapid- acting ( prandial ) e.g . aspart , glulisine and lispro . both conventional human insulins and insulin analogues may be used in patients with t1dm . the long-acting insulin analogues are recommended in patients with severe or nocturnal hypoglycaemia and who are using an intensified insulin regimen . the insulin regimen should be tailored to the individual patient to achieve the best possible glycaemic control without disabling hypoglycaemia . type 2 diabetes t2dm occurs due to reduced secretion of insulin , or peripheral resistance to the action of insulin ( insulin resistance ) , or due to a combination of both . depending on the status of the condition , t2dm can be treated with lifestyle changes and or oral and non-insulin injectable drugs and or insulin therapy . the treatment pathways for patients with t2dm differ amongst different international guidelines . however , the following principles are common amongst these guidelines . lifestyle modification with emphasis on diet , exercise and continued education is a key pillar in the management of t2dm in any of the clinical pathways that may be pursued . t2dm is a chronic progressive disease requirement for multiple medications to achieve targets increases with time due to decreasing beta-cell function in the pancreas . thus , most patients will require combinations of drugs in order to lower blood glucose levels . the hb a1c target should be individualized according to several patient factors including age , co-morbid conditions , diabetes duration , risk of hypoglycaemia , patient motivation , adherence and life expectancy . the choice of therapy should also be individualized , and a patient-centered approach should be employed . choice is determined on numerous factors including patient characteristics , profiles of the medications themselves and availability/affordability of the different options . patient factors that influence the choice of drugs include other comorbidities e.g . kidney , liver and heart disease , ease of use and patient preference . drug factors that influence the choice of therapy include contraindications and side -effects of the drugs themselves . particular consider action is given to the hypoglycaemia and weight gain potential of these drugs . these two side -effects can adversely affect patient safety , adherence and cost . metformin remains the first-line drug in t2dm if there are no contra indications to it . deployment of metformin at population level is a commonly used indicator of appropriate health system performance in relation to diabetes . available data indicates that we have a fairly good rate of deployment of metformin in malta , yet the place of metformin as the first line drug for t2dm needs to be continually emphasised . the choice of the second-line drug following metformin is not very well backed up by studies and long-term data . thus , various combinations using one or two additional oral or injectable agents are reasonable and recommended interchangeably . the aim is to achieve the patients target level of glycaemic control without significant side -effects . many patients with t2dm may ultimately require insulin therapy ( alone or in combination with other drugs ) as the disease progresses . the management of hyperglycaemia should be put in the context of the overall management of the cardiovascular risk of the patient . management of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia is a key component of successful diabetes care programmes ( and ensuring successful outcomes ) . current local availability of anti-diabetes drugs on the malta government formulary list insulins entitlement to free medication through the public health sector outside a hospital setting is based on the principle of social solidarity and occurs through a system based on criteria linked to disease or means by virtue of the social security act cap 318 article 23 and the amendment of this act-act no . 1 of 2012 and the fifth schedule of the same act . those patients suffering from chronic conditions usually fall under schedule v ( yellow card ) , whilst those with limited means generally pertain to the schedule ii ( pink card ) . human insulins-soluble insulin , isophane insulin and biphasic insulin they are all available in vial form ( for use with an insulin syringe ) and cartridge form ( for use with an insulin pen ) . the human insulins in vial form can be used in all types of diabetes without restriction . however , human insulins in cartridge form are protocol-regulated . they are only available to patients with t1dm or to those who suffer from t2dm and have accompanying visual disturbance . insulin glargine and insulin as part analogues approved for patients with type 1 diabetes only the current entitlement protocol for glargine states that patients should have been for at least six months on a multi dose regimen of conventional insulin ; they should be testing their blood sugar on a four times a day basis for at least three months ; and that their blood glucose monitoring reveals frequent fluctuations in blood sugar with a minimum average of two nocturnal hypoglycaemic episodes per week . the current entitlement protocol for as part states that patients should have been for at least 6 months o n a multi-dose regimen of conventional insulin ; must be testing their blood sugar on a four times a day basis for at least three months ; and that the blood glucose monitoring reveals frequent fluctuations in blood sugar with a minimum average of two postprandial hyperglycaemic episodes per week . oral agents and non-insulin injectables until recently there were only three oral agents on the malta gfl metformin , glibenclamide and gliclazide . these drugs are issued to patients via the schedule v or schedule ii entitlement system . the situation has changed with the adoption of a new pathway for the treatment of diabetes as outlined in the subsequent sections in this chapter . there are currently no non -insulin injectables on the malta gfl . Actions expansion of the government formulary for diabetes following the launch of the consultation document in november 2014 , it was immediately apparent that the lacunae in the government formulary for diabetes had to be addressed with urgency . for a large number of years , the hypoglycaemic drugs available on the government formulary remained unchanged . conscious of the importance of strict glycaemic control , this strategy document recommends that new second line drugs are introduced on the government formulary list ( gfl ) . specifically , repaglinide and gliptins need to be introduced on the gfl at an early stage . it is recommended that insulin analogues at the moment protocol regulated for t1dm-are introduced for all types of diabetes at a later stage . difficulties with access to treatment has been highlighted as an issue which often causes delays in starting treatment . this has been particularly highlighted for example for the use of antibiotics with serious foot infections . steps are being taken to streamline the procedures to obtain antibiotics to treat infections without undue delay . the following actions are therefore being implemented : early provision of gliptins and repaglinide to all those who meet the clinical criteria according to an approved treatment pathway reduction in bureaucracy in the current entitlement protocols for insulin analogues so that they can be given to patients with type 1dm upon diagnosis according to clinical advice . swift access to antibiotics for infections associated with diabetes hypodermic equipment for insulin administration there is currently a quota for the amount of insulin syringes given to patients free of charge . pink card holders get 10 syringes per month whereas patients who have a yellow card for diabetes are entitled to 30 syringes per month . a phased process to increase the monthly quota of syringes in order to support a single use policy will be implemented starting by increasing the monthly quota of syringes for persons with type 1 diabetes monitoring devices for diabetes mellitus persons with type 1 diabetes usually require intensive monitoring of their blood sugar . the current entitlement criteria for the supply of blood glucose monitoring strips for persons with type 1 diabetes are age-dependent . in order to promote self -management of diabetes , it is recommended that four blood glucose strips daily are given to all patients with type 1 diabetes . chapter5 : further developing patient centred services in diabetes care . the management and care of persons with diabetes in malta has developed over the years in line with the st. vincent declaration . the hub for specialist care and management of diabetes and it complications is the diabetes clinic at mater dei hospital . over the past years , efforts have been made to develop a shared care programme with primary care through the health centres . both the care given at mater dei and health centres is supported by nurses and allied health professionals . private general practitioners and specialists in private practice also play an important role in the care and follow up of persons with diabetes . whilst recognizing the efforts made by dedicated health care professionals to provide quality services for persons with diabetes , there always remains more that can be done to ensure that access to high quality services for all patients irrespective of where they obtain their care . the strategy proposes the implementation of a numb er of initiatives to facilitate the implementation of a coordinated , integrated , multidisciplinary service of consistently high quality for all persons with diabetes . the main focus of future service development is to ensure that all persons with diabetes are monitored regularly to ensure risk factor modification and management , including good glycaemic control , to avoid complications . persons with uncomplicated t2dm should be cared for primarily in a community setting through shared care between trained g eneral practitioners and diabetes specialists . this will allow the diabetes clinic based at mater dei hospital to dedicate its resources towards the fulfilment of its mission as a tertiary referral centre for all patients with diabetes identified as requiring regular and intensive specialist care provision whilst remaining the hub for the coordination of all diabetes related services . however , the need to provide high quality services for persons with diabetes in hospitals other than mater dei emerged as an important and urgent priority during the consultation process which needs to be addressed . the development and elaboration of detailed care pathways for patients with different needs has been identified as a key component for the successful implementation of consistently high-quality care across hospital and community and between public and private sectors . care pathways are a means of ensuring consistently high quality of care for all patients as well as educating and empowering patients to engage as partners in their own care . the shared care programme for patients with uncomplicated t2 dmhas been recently updated . one important addition has been the possibility for private sector practitioners to participate in this programme . this is an important component that needs to be fully implemented to ensure that persons seen in the private sector have access to further follow on care without encountering difficulties . the provision of access to key diabetes related services for all doctors participating in the approved shared care program will be implemented in a phased manner . an integrated service of high quality diabetes is known to be associated with increased risk of long -term complications . these include microvascular disease , such as retinopathy , neuropathy and diabetic nephropathy . there is also increased risk of developing macrovascular disease ( coronary heart disease , peripheral vascular disease and cerebrovascular disease ) . health care services for persons with diabetes have the aim of preventing complications as well as ensuring holistic support and well-being . there is a good infrastructure that has been developed over the years particularly the shared care programme between the diabetes clinics in health centres and the specialist referral centre in mater dei hospital which provides a starting point on which to continue to build . the main challenge ahead is to move from a system of passive surveillance to a system where all persons with diabetes are actively invited for monitoring of preventable complications . another important aspect is the strengthening of the human resources complement to ensure that persons deemed to be at greater risk or who are in need of additional support are able to obtain the necessary care and assistance promptly with regular in-depth support . Philosophy of care persons with diabetes need the care and support of a multidisciplinary team of professionals . t2dm is a common chronic condition whose prevalence is set to increase particularly in view of demographic trends . the philosophy of care being recommended is that of management in the community based upon continuity , active follow up , quality documentation and rapid links to specialist advice and care . management of gestational diabetes diabetes in pregnancy can have serious consequences for both mother and baby if undiagnosed and untreated . systematic screening for diabetes in all pregnant mothers will continue to be undertaken . a national standard of care for screening , management of the condition in pregnancy and follow up after pregnancy will be developed to ensure that all pregnant mothers get the best possible care . documentation on the screening tests performed and their outcomes will be maintained by all antenatal care centres . mothers who develop gestational diabetes will be followed up in an active and enhanced manner after delivery since they are known to be at higher risk of developing t2 dm . type2 diabetes-shared care based on consistency , quality and continuity the needs of persons with t2dm will vary depending upon their age , disease progression and existence of other comorbidities . this may require the tailoring of individualised care . however , there are key common principles that apply to all persons with t2dm in our efforts to avoid or delay the emergence of complications . consistency , comprehensiveness and active surveillance shall be the hallmarks of the diabetes care programme . in order to fulfil these objectives , the department of primary care and the diabetes centre at mater dei hospital have updated their shared care programme . although a minimum national standard of care is prescribed , patients are also free to choose where and how they wish to receive care for their diabetes . the aim is to create a system that integrates care provision between hospital and the community and between the public and private sectors . Diagnosis and early stages of type 2 diabetes the diagnosis of t2dm is often a chance finding arising from a routine health check carried out through one ’ s family doctor or health centre . persons diagnosed with t2dm should receive the best support and care possible immediately upon a confirmed diagnosis . all persons with newly diagnosed t2dm will be invited and encouraged to enroll in the national diabetes prevention and management system . this enrolment can be performed through the health centres . in line with this proposal all newly diagnosed patients by public or private general practitioners are to be referred to the health centres where the nurses in charge of managing the diabetes clinics ensure that the patient is enrolled in the national diabetes information system . appointments are made for specialist assessment and review by a diabetologist as well as initial screening for diabetic retinopathy and podiatry review . baseline investigations and measurements are taken and recorded . patients will be referred for health literacy and diabetes education sessions . patients will also be referred for smoking cessation , weight management or exercise assessment and prescription as may be required . both public and private general practitioners shall retain the right to refer patients directly to the mater dei diabetes clinic , if this is clinically indicated to do so . the choice to access treatment in the private sector at all stages remains with the patients who can indicate the name of the private family doctor of their own choice who will continue to provide routine follow up or that of a private diabetologist . all patients irrespective of whether they choose to have their care in a public or private setting will be invited to participate in the national diabetes programme . in the shared care programme all persons with t2dm diabetes are invited to enroll in a national screening programme for prevention of complications . through such enrolment , patients shall be invited at pre-established intervals for preventive screening encounters . this will guarantee that all persons with diabetes have annual blood tests to ensure good glycaemic control , monitor renal function and blood lipids . these results are recorded in the system and provided to the patients general practitioner . this will avoid duplication of tests . the system will ensure that examinations or tests carried out in the private sector are not repeated unnecessarily in the public sector . through this programme patients shall be invited to undergo regular screening through clinical examination , blood investigations , eye screening and foot screening as outlined in the shared care programme . in this manner it is ensured that all persons with diabetes benefit from a national standard of care . the importance of screening for complications will also be addressed in the educational campaigns . active follow up and surveillance will be offered particularly to persons who do not appear to be attending for structured follow up . an enhanced focus on social issues that may deter persons from seeking appropriate care for their diabetes will be made . all patients enrolled in the shared care programme still retain the right to be seen by a specialist for their diabetes care . besides the scheduled routine follow ups at the prescribed time interval appropriate for their clinical condition , urgent fast track referrals from both private and public gps participating in the shared care programme will be facilitated to ensure prompt access for patients who need to be given urgent specialist attention . the pharmacy of your choice scheme will continue to play an important role in the care of persons with diabetes through the provision of advice pertaining to medicines and their side effects , assistance with queries regarding self-management and recognition of non-compliance or need for medication review . the pharmacist is also an integra l part of the multi-disciplinary team and should take the opportunity to reinforce the need for enrolment into the diabetes information system , regular attendance for screening and for updates on matters relating to diabetes self-management . clinical pharmacists are in a position to collaborate with other health-care professionals and can use their expertise to manage and monitor diabetes treatment plans . they have a role in the approach to patient-centred care and can intervene on initiation , dosing , monitoring and discontinuation of drug therapy . in the hospital setting clinical pharmacists can intervene on the wards or during out -patient clinics e.g . diabetes clinic . on the wards they actively participate in medication selection as part of the medical team . they also perform medication reconciliation which is a formal process whereby pharmacists work together with patients , families and care providers to ensure that accurate and comprehensive medication information is communicated consistently across transitions of care in the out-patient clinics clinical pharmacists can offer interim drug therapy visits , patient education , treatment adherence monitoring , health barriers assessment and prevention screening 6. utilization of pharmacists as an essential part of the healthcare team to prevent and manage disease in collaboration with other clinicians can improve quality , contain costs , and increase access to care . recognition of pharmacists as healthcare providers , clinicians and an essential part of the healthcare team is appropriate given the level of care they can provide . ongoing care and support ongoing care and support for persons with t2dm shall primarily take place in the community through the shared care approach with the involvement of both the public and private sector depending upon the patient ’ s choice . in order to achieve best outcomes and to make best use of resources , it is envisaged that patients with uncomplicated t2dm will be cared jointly by general practitioners trained in diabetes care and by a diabetologist . the frequency of these visits will be as clinically required , but all patients should be seen at least once annually . patients with brittle diabetes , diabetes during pregnancy or complications shall be cared for primarily by diabetologists . at annual follow up , patients will have routine clinical review and investigations in line with the national standard for diabetes care . all results are to be captured in the diabetes information system . appointment s for eye and foot screening are organized and appointments for specialist review are made on a routine or urgent basis depending upon clinical findings . during follow up visits , patients are also specifically encouraged to attend follow up educational sessions and maybe referred for dietetic or psychological advice as required . specialist intensive care through an mdt approach the shared care programme based primarily in a primary care or community setting is intended for persons with uncomplicated t2dm . persons with t1dm , gestational diabetes , maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) , other rare forms of diabetes , early onset t2dm and t2dm with complications or which is difficult to control require management of their diabetes given within a specialist setting with regular follow up from all members of the multidisciplinary team . dietary and psychological consultations should be considered as part of the routine follow up for persons requiring close monitoring and support . documentation of all care episodes will be maintained through the diabetes information system . tailored educational sessions in small groups or one to one will be organized as required particularly for persons going through life transitions and for young women in relation to planning pregnancy . prevention and management of eye complications diabetes increases the risk of cataracts and of damage to the retina of the eyes ( diabetic retinopathy ) . in europe , cataracts accounted for of 13.8 -21.6 % blindness in 2010 , whilst diabetic retinopathy accounted for 3.7 -4.2 % . the prevalence of blindness secondary to retinopathy has decreased in many parts of the world because of regular eye screening . in the uk , where a national diabetic retinopathy screening is in place , 56.0 % of t1dm subjects have retinopathy and 11.2 % have sight-threatening retinopathy ; the corresponding figures for t2dm are 30.3 % and 2.9 % respectively . the importance of such regular screening lies in the fact that diabetic retinopathy is often asymptomatic until it has caused irreversible damage and visual loss . A number of persons with undiagnosed diabetes , unfortunately present de novo with vascular eye complications . this should be addressed through the setting up of the diabetes screening programme . furthermore , eye complications can be treated more easily if diagnosed when the patients are still asymptomatic . the establishment of an organized eye screening programme for all persons with diabetes and prompt referral in cases where suspicious pathology is found will enable eye complications to be tacked earlier and more aggressively . there is a need to educate persons with diabetes about the benefits of early laser therapy . the overall goal is to continue to reduce the incidence of blindness associated with diabetes . all persons enrolled in the national diabetes information system will be assessed and monitored regularly to ensure good glycaemic control . this will already assist in the preventing microvascular disease but alone it is not enough . the situation today is such that not all persons with diabetes are carrying out appropriate and regular screening for eye complications . as part of the educational sessions and campaigns , persons with an initial diagnosis of diabetes are made aware of the important of attending screening since argon laser treatment works best when patients are still symptomatic . screening will be performed through an annual assessment using the retinopathy screening fundus cameras that have recently been installed in health centres as well as the fundus cameras available at mater dei hospital . persons enrolled in the national diabetes information system will receive an annual invitation for screening and assessment . fund us images taken by trained ophthalmology nurses or other trained health care professionals and reviewed by ophthalmologists or optometrists shall be assessed using standard criteria . persons with suspicious or definitive pathology will be referred to the ophthalmic department at mater dei hospital through an agreed fast track system . Prevention and management of kidney complications diabetes is the leading cause of kidney disease . diabetic kidney disease is the medical term for kidney disease caused by diabetes . diabetic kidney disease affects both kidneys at the same time . diabetic kidney disease increases mortality even at its early stages . it is now the major cause for the need of dialysis in many countries and the proportion of dialysis patients who are diabetic continues to rise . although outcomes of dialysis in diabetic subjects have improved , mortality is still quite high with a median survival of 3.84 years in t1dm and 2.16 years in t2dm . dialysis is associated with significant health care costs in all patients , but costs are even higher in diabetic subjects by about 27 % . intensive management of blood glucose or glycaemic control has shown great promise for people with diabetes , not only to prevent kidney disease but also in those in the early stages of chronic kidney disease . regular monitoring , lifestyle changes and medication are all important to help persons with diabetes achieve good control . screening for diabetic kidney disease is carried out using three simple tests : blood pressure test . this test must be done at every health care visit . albumin and creatinine measurement . a sample of urine for a urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio test should be done at least once a year . an elevated result is a warning sign of kidney disease . estimated glomerular filtration rate ( egfr ) test . this blood test measures how much blood the kidneys filter each minute . a reduction in the egfr may indicate kidney damage or kidney failure . this test is performed at least once a year . high blood pressure is the other leading cause of kidney disease in people with diabetes . high blood pressure can also be a result of damage from kidney disease . in persons with diabetes , the presence of hypertension may mean that the kidneys are already damaged . even a small rise in blood pressure can quickly make kidney disease worse . some persons will eventually require support through dialysis . specialized care and attention will continue to be given to these patients with an emphasis on pre -dialysis counselling and preparation . a number of persons with diabetes will unfortunately develop diabetic kidney disease . persons who are deemed at risk of requiring renal replacement therapy should be referred to a clinic which will help educate and prepare them psychologically for this difficult transition in care . efforts will be made to establish a pre-dialysis clinic with education and support through a multi -disciplinary team . persons with diabetes requiring dialysis will receive the best support and care possible through the renal unit at mater dei hospital . recently the unit has extended its hours of service in order to continue to better meet the patients growing service needs . Prevention and management of foot complications patients with t2dm mellitus were found to be nearly 400 times more likely to undergo an initial minor toe ( transphalangeal ) amputation and had almost a 12-fold increased risk of a below -knee amputation . more than 60 % of lower-extremity amputations are believed to be attributable to t2dm . the 25-year cumulative incidence of lower-extremity amputation in people with t1dm was estimated ( in the wisconsin study ) to be 10.1 % . diabetes is also associated with worse outcomes in hospitalized patients with foot problems . in patients undergoing lower extremity bypass surgery , it is associated with worse outcome , longer hospital stays and higher costs . there is a need for a proper national foot screening programme to become established where all persons with diabetes are offered appointments in their local health centres for podiatric foot assessment with risk stratification and follow up intervals based on that risk assessment . the programme for diabetes should constitute first level screening and second level assessment . patients with diabetes would benefit from an initial assessment with subsequent follow ups according to risk stratification but some patients deemed to be at higher risk will benefit from more regular and specialized assessment and follow up . this first level screening should occur at all health centres and should include a vascular , neurological and biomechanical assessment . if vascular pathology that requires immediate intervention is confirmed , patients will be referred through a fast-track system for a full vascular assessment at mater dei vascular unit . closer attention will be given to foot biomechanics such that further service development to adopt preventive measures that can postpone the occurrence of foot complications shall take place in consultation with the professionals concerned . persons experiencing vascular complications should be able to access the necessary treatment without delay . this could include access to antibiotics and special dressings . orthotics and prosthesis persons who undergo surgery require appropriate support and rehabilitation . one of the key sources for such care is the orthotics and prosthetics unit . investment in upgrading of the orthotic and prosthetic facility will take place as part of the overall investment in the rehabilitation facility through a public -private partnership . investment in training of human resources will also be addressed as a priority for the strengthening of the multidisciplinary team for diabetes . allied health the role of allied health practitioners in the support of persons with diabetes ranges from primary prevention through education , to diagnosis in the laboratories , to provision of support at all stage of the illness . the allied health professionals play an important role in the management and improvement of care outcomes for diabetes . the main areas identified for priority investment in human resources are for dietitians , prosthetists and orthotic technicians . gozogozitan residents who are diabetic also deserve the best standards of care and management for their condition . although some outreach is presently performed there is a need to increase the presence of specialists on the island . whilst mater dei hospital remains the tertiary referral centre for all persons with diabetes in the maltese islands , it is also important that for uncomplicated t2dm , gozo also joins the shared care programme as this will allow routine follow up to be carried out to the same standard as being advocated for patients in malta . the setting up of a specialist diabetes service in gozo is a key priority in this strategy which will be achieved with the development of the gozo health hub through a public private partnership . mental health services diabetic patients with mental health problems will benefit from the envisioned improvements in the mental health sector . elderly persons with multimorbidity diabetes affects more than one in four persons over the age of 60 in malta . the management of diabetes in the elderly must be carried out in the background context of other conditions . care plans must be carefully developed where the treatment of hyperglycaemia should not be carried out in isolation but should be balanced with the risks of hypoglycaemia , falls fractures etc . the provision of drugs which have a low hypoglycaemia risk is also important in this regard and is an important priority that is already being addressed . specialized outreach clinics will be implemented in geriatric settings with improvement of the quality of care for elderly persons with diabetes elderly persons who are home bound and in need of support for insulin administration should be provided with simple regimes that are easy to administer and that can facilitate self-care and adherence . diabetes information system the capture of data on all patients with diabetes at a national level in a single information system allows active surveillance through personalized invitations for screening in order to encourage a high attendance . it will also allow measurement of progress i n attaining the set targets of the strategy , regular evaluation and benchmarking with other health care systems . therefore , every effort should be made to ensure the capture of data for all persons with diabetes in the information management system . this will require training and rolling out of access . it will be important to ensure that the data available in this system would be eventually integrated in the electronic medical record once this is developed at national health system level . initially , it is proposed that investment is made in a call/recall system that can allow patients to receive reminders to attend appointments , have blood investigation and access retinal and foot screening programmes . this system will be invaluable in identifying persons who are not being followed up and instituting active surveillance and outreach . as a result of these initiatives the following actions will be implemented : a high quality electronic health record for all patients with diabetes as part of the national health ict infrastructure the setting up of a call and recall system for setting appointments for eye and foot screening choice freedom to choose ones health care provider will remain an important principle since the doctor -patient relationship is key to a successful outcome in the management of diabetes . whilst patients will be offered the opportunity to access good quality health care offered free of charge through the diabetes clinics in health centres , it is recognized that some patients will prefer to remain under the care of their own private general practitioner or private specialist . it is nonetheless strongly recommended that all patients be encouraged to enroll in the national diabetes information system in order to access the opportunity for structured monitoring and screening on a regular basis . family doctors will have full access to individual patients ’ data on the diabetes information system with the patients consent . chapter6 : quality of life : the patient perspective in keeping with the who definition of health as a state of complete physical , mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity , the care for persons with diabetes needs to encompass not only the biological aspects of the disease , but psychosocial aspects too . the goal is to empower persons with diabetes by increasing their levels of self-efficacy and self-care . dietetic services dietary guidelines should be addressed immediately at diagnosis in order to introduce a healthy diet early on , especially when weight loss is required in obese persons . an increase in the complement of trained dieticians which is possible due to the implementation of local degree programmes and practical training in partnership between the university of malta and the ministry for energy and health will enable a quality leap in the dietetic services that can be offered . the use of personalized mobile technology ( mhealth ) can direct patients towards self-regulation in the choice of a healthy diet . persons with diabetes and their families also require access to routine visits offered by psychologists . such a service is particularly important for parents with children who are diagnosed with diabetes , the children themselves , adolescents , young adults and persons of all ages going through life transitions . some of these have no-one to turn to express their innermost struggle and difficulties . couples have encountered marital problems when their child becomes diagnosed with diabetes , older patients have had to deal with anger , frustration , denial , depression and rebellion all on their own , sometimes leading them to become anti-social and unresponsive to their own wellbeing . children and adolescents have to tackle bullying , denial of their condition so that they do not stand out as different form their friends , leading some to stop taking their insulin resorting to drugs and hiding their condition even from their most intimate friends and partners . furthermore , the health interview survey conducted in the maltese islands in 2008 showed that persons with diabetes have a higher prevalence of anxiety and depression . depression can affect the individual ’ s motivation to comply with diet and treatment leading to complications and further contributing to stress and anxiety . all health care professionals involved in the care of persons with diabetes should be trained to recognise the signs and symptoms of anxiety and depression . persons with diabetes , particularly those who are dependent on insulin will often encounter a crisis or a new situation which they feel ill-equipped to deal with . besides scheduled support for dietary and psychological advice , persons with diabetes know that the timely response to queries arising on a day-to-day basis is invaluable . In such circumstances , timely advice given over the phone may avert a visit , an admission or trigger the need for an urgent consultation . at present , an informal arrangement on a voluntary basis has been in place . given the burden on the providers of the service and the growing numbers of patients or relatives who could benefit from such a service , it is felt that a more formal arrangement ought to be established . a formal 24/7 nursing led support service will be established once sufficient trained human resources to staff the service are available . this would help persons who need quick advice over the phone . patient diabetes education ( pde ) has been shown to improve outcome indicators and ultimately the quality of life of persons with diabetes . they are effective by improving diabetes knowledge , lifestyle and psychosocial outcomes . holding these sessions in the community would be more accessible , and reduce the stigma associated with hospital-based care . education should be an integral part of the management of all people with diabetes : from around the time of diagnosis , on an ongoing basis , based on annual assessment of need , and on request . a trained multidisciplinary team can provide education to groups of people with diabetes , or individually if group work is considered unsuitable . where possible , family members or friends should be included . these should be led by health-care professionals with specialist training in diabetes and delivery of education for people with diabetes . it should be accessible to all people with diabetes , taking account of culture , ethnicity , psychosocial , and disability issues . education can be delivered in the community , and in different languages . techniques of active learning should be used , adapted to personal choices and learning styles . the use of modern communications technologies may advance the methods of delivery of diabetes education . persons living with diabetes do not only have rights but also duties and this is not always highlighted . it is important to instill in the person with diabetes that they should not hide their condition . the person with diabetes has to make their condition known to their immediate friends and colleagues at work . they should be informed on the symptoms of hypoglycemia and how to remedy it in cases of emergency . the employer on their part can take the necessary steps to ensure employee wellbeing by ensuring that the employee is not hindered in taking the necessary measures to control their diabetes , such as by providing a private space where they can monitor and inject . educating the general public on diabetes and removing the taboo attached to this condition would also address discrimination when it comes to job interviews . persons with diabetes can and do live normal everyday lives if they are well-controlled . prospective employers should not be wary of employing persons with diabetes especially if they are provided with proof that the person is well controlled . whatever the circumstances , it is important to carry identification on the medical condition . the maltese diabetes association distributes , free of charge , identification id stating that the holder is a person with diabetes . this would help prevent instances where someone with hypoglycemia is mistaken to be under the influence of mood-altering substances . initial first aid would also be more effective if those who assist or paramedics know that the person has diabetes . in addition , the department of diabetes and endocrinology and the diabetes education unit also give out identification cards with patients ’ details , emergency contact details , and current treatment and dose written on the card . persons experiencing personal or social difficulties in their life may also find it difficult to cope with their diabetes . persons who are socially excluded also need to be actively supported through the efforts of psychologists and social workers since failure to address their social problems will not allow for the attainment of successful outcomes in the management of their diabetes . in families and persons at-risk of poverty and low-income families , clinician recommendations might be completely disregarded due to the lack of resources . such circumstances are especially evident in families with small children and pensioners . often these persons need a friendly ear to turn to , someone who is willing to hear them out and encourage them to keep going and not give up as well as to guide them to sources of practical support . quality of life deteriorates once a person with diabetes develops complications due to a changed lifestyle . the burden on the person and the immediate family can not be quantified . they have to adjust to their new medical condition , frequent visits to their doctors and admissions to the hospital . social support for persons with diabetes who are experiencing a difficult social situation will help these persons maintain normoglycemic control and decrease the risk of complications . chapter 7 : paediatric diabetes epidemiology of childhood diabetes in malta t1dm is one of the commonest chronic conditions in childhood . the incidence of t1dm in malta during the period 2006 - 2010 in children under the age of 14 years is calculated to be 21.86/100,000/year , with the highest incidence registered in the 5–9-year-old age group . an annual increase in incidence over this period has been registered in children under ten years . the reasons for this increase in incidence are unknown , and this phenomenon has also been observed in other countries . the first diabetes clinic in a government hospital ( st luke 's hospital ) was set up in 1963. since 1969 diabetic children were managed by paediatricians or by physicians specialized in adult internal medicine . in 2006 , the responsibility of care of diabetic children was transferred to the department of paediatrics with the appointment of a consultant paediatric endocrinologist . since that time , the paediatric diabetes service ( pds ) has been involved in the care of 181 children with diabetes , 95 % of whom had t1dm . the upper age limit within the paediatric diabetes service was initially 14 years , but this was extended to 16 years in 2011. there are currently around 140 children under the age of 16 years with diabetes ( 94 % with t1dm ) who make use of the paediatric diabetes service . children with new-onset t1dm and their families require intensive diabetes education by a paediatric diabetes healthcare ( dhc ) team to provide them with the necessary skills and knowledge to manage this disease . the complex physical , developmental , and emotional needs of children and their families necessitate specialized care to ensure the best long-term outcomes . newly-diagnosed patients are admitted to the hospital for an average of 5 - 7 days for metabolic stabilization as well as intensive education of the family regarding diabetes care . during this initial period of hospitalization , each individual patient 's family receives an intensive , structured program of education that takes up 20 hours or more . on average , each child is reviewed around six times a year , although newly-diagnosed patients are seen much more frequently in the first few weeks after discharge from the hospital . very young children ( e.g . under 6 years of age ) also require more frequent review . relatively few patients miss outpatient appointments . in order to ensure that no children are lost to follow-up , those who miss appointments are contacted by phone and another appointment is given at the first available opportunity . a separate visiting consultant clinic is also held at gozo general hospital every 3-4 months in conjunction with the consultant paediatricians at that hospital . the introduction of point-of-care capillary blood testing for glycosylated hemoglobin ( hba1c ) in 2012 has allowed the measurement of hba1c every 2 – 3 months on all young children with diabetes . this has been found to be very useful in the management and education of young people with diabetes . the care and management of children and adolescents with diabetes are also focused towards preventing complications later on in life . the following table shows the recommended screening programme for children with diabetes as recommended by the international society for pediatric and adolescent diabetes . the management of childhood diabetes , especially t1dm , is extremely complex . young children with diabetes should be managed by a multidisciplinary team ( mdt ) lead by a doctor specialized in pediatric diabetes care . the royal college of nursing recommends that the complement of diabetes nurse specialists ( dns ) in a pediatric diabetes service should be 1.0 wte per 70 diabetic children ( royal college of nursing , 2005 ) . this means that the pediatric service at mater dei hospital should have two full-time diabetes nurse specialists . currently , children with diabetes are supported by the two diabetes nurse specialists who are expected to cater to the entire diabetic population in malta and gozo . it is envisaged that additional recruitment of diabetes nurse specialists will allow for a diabetes nurse to be dedicated solely for pediatric diabetes . all children with t1dm should receive counseling from a registered dietitian with a special interest in pediatric diabetes . children with diabetes should follow a healthy diet as recommended for children without diabetes . this involves consuming a variety of foods . there is no evidence that one form of nutrition therapy is superior to another in attaining age-appropriate glycemic targets . appropriate matching of insulin to carbohydrate content may allow increased flexibility and improved glycemic control . the effect of protein and fat on glucose absorption must also be considered . nutrition therapy should be individualized ( based on the child 's age , nutritional needs , eating habits , lifestyle , ability , and interest ) and must ensure normal growth and development without compromising glycemic control . this plan should be evaluated regularly and at least annually . as diabetes care can be very demanding on affected children and their families , these should also be reviewed regularly by a psychologist . anticipatory guidance and lifestyle counseling should be part of routine care , especially during critical developmental transitions ( e.g . upon school entry , leaving secondary school ) . psychologists should regularly initiate discussions with children and their families about school , psychological issues , substance use , obtaining a driver 's license , and career choices . achieving the appropriate human resource complement to cater adequately for children with diabetes has been identified as an immediate priority . increasing the competent health professional workforce is a necessary prerequisite to allow service improvements to be made , better support and care to be given to patients , and the introduction of innovative services such as an insulin pump service . the protocol for use within the public health service currently obliges clinicians to start newly-diagnosed children with diabetes on human insulin preparations . this means that all children have to start on a conventional twice-daily regimen , which is considered to have several disadvantages ( increased risk of hypoglycemia , increased risk of poor glycemic control , higher levels of glycosylated hemoglobin , more adverse long-term outcomes , etc . ) . current practice in centers of excellence around the world is to start children with t1dm on a multiple daily insulin regimen ( i.e . using insulin analogues ) or an insulin pump from the time of initial diagnosis . these regimens are associated with tighter glycemic control , fewer hypoglycemic episodes , better quality of life , and fewer long-term complications related to diabetes . the vast majority of young diabetic patients on a conventional twice-daily insulin regimen experience poor glycemic control and/or significant and recurrent hypoglycemic events . children with diabetes will henceforth be started immediately on an insulin analogue if this is deemed the best clinical option for that particular individual . any future introduction of an insulin pump service for children must be planned properly in advance and necessitates the availability of sufficient numbers of trained human resources . failure to introduce a service within the necessary safety standards would place patients at high risk . a detailed impact assessment of developing an insulin pump service will be carried out . children with diabetes are entitled to receive the following items free-of-charge through the public health service . the provision of these supplies is important to help children and their families in the daily management of their condition and the monitoring of blood glucose several times a day has been shown to improve long-term outcomes . children spend a substantial part of their day at school . this includes both winter and summer schools . children with diabetes are also encouraged to participate in out-of-school activities such as sports activities since these are important to help their integration and self-esteem besides keeping their blood glucose better controlled . during school hours , most children need to check their blood glucose at least once ( e.g . just before their midday break ) , and a number of them may also need to take an insulin dose just before they eat their school lunch . most children above eight years are able to understand the basics of diabetes care , check their own blood glucose with their glucose meter and are also competent in self-administration of subcutaneous insulin injections . on the other hand , younger children have to rely on a responsible adult who has some knowledge of diabetes care . efforts to reach a situation where every school has , at least , one person who is trained and certified competent in performing blood glucose measurement and administering insulin will be done . diabetes control may worsen during adolescence . factors responsible for this deterioration include adolescent adjustment issues , psychosocial distress , intentional insulin omission , and physiological insulin resistance . a careful multidisciplinary assessment should be undertaken for every child with chronic poor metabolic control to identify potential causative factors , such as depression and eating disorders , and to identify and address barriers to improved control . furthermore , adolescents with diabetes should receive regular counseling about sexual health and contraception . unplanned pregnancies should be avoided , as pregnancy in adolescent females with t1dm with suboptimal metabolic control may result in higher risks of maternal and fetal complications . the time of care transitioning from the paediatric diabetes service to the adult diabetes service is a sensitive one for adolescents with diabetes and their families . besides the difficulties of managing their diabetic condition which arise during this period , adolescents also need to cope with the changes brought about through the healthcare system as their care is taken over by the adult diabetic service . the change of physician or team can have a major impact on disease management and metabolic control in the person with diabetes with some young adults defaulting follow-up during the transition from paediatric to adult diabetes care services and being more likely to experience hospitalisation for dka during this period . organised transition services are important to avoid such episodes . the transition has been described as “ traumatic ” since from a relatively sheltered service catering for less than 200 persons , adolescents with t1dm find themselves being cared for in a service that has to cater for around 30,000 persons with diabetes . there is currently a lack of an established transfer mechanism for the care given to children who are 16 years and under , and to those who are in their late teens . this arises due to the transition of care from the children ’ s clinic to the adult diabetes clinics . at a time when these persons are passing through physical , emotional and lifestyle changes , they are thrust from a familiar atmosphere to one where they are expected to fit in with the rest of the diabetic patient population . the transition should be gradual and the handover done over a period of time . for this reasons a joint transition care clinic for adolescents with diabetes to move seamlessly from paediatric to adult services will be established . adolescents who are 18 and over should be encouraged to attend the clinic alone without the supervision of the parents in order to induce a more congenial atmosphere where the patient can be more relaxed and can open up without the fear of their parents ’ opinion . adolescents frequent places of leisure where self-management of diabetes may be compromised due to lack of access to a clean , secure and hygienic environment . operators of leisure and social facilities for young people should be made aware of the needs of adolescents with diabetes , and efforts should be made to provide safe facilities where monitoring and insulin administration may take place safely . diabetes is one of the commonest chronic conditions currently affecting the maltese population . research serves to provide the necessary evidence that allows innovation with the objective of preventing or delaying diabetes or its complications . whilst international evidence is very important in guiding standards of clinical practice , contextual factors profoundly affect incidence and management of diabetes . therefore , the need for local research that translates and tests international evidence in the local context is required . much local research has taken place over the past years . often this is not properly disseminated particularly if it is not published in impact factor peer-reviewed journals . the main priorities for research in diabetes that have been identified in the preparation of this strategy are the following : local genetics of diabetes and interaction between genetic predisposition and risk factors in the environment , reasons for increasing incidence of t1dm , motivational factors and compliance with diet or treatment regimens , national prevalence study of diabetes , ehealth or mhealth and diabetes management . through the national diabetes strategy , it is proposed to better organise and coordinate the efforts , resources , and expertise available in order to ensure larger more effective research projects . government bodies , academic institutions , practicing clinicians , industry , and ngos are encouraged to come together and pool their resources towards research projects which can have a significant impact at both national and international levels . prevalence data for persons with diabetes is sorely lacking at a national level . the last fully-fledged prevalence study took place under the auspices of the who monica project in the mid-1980s . a scientific prevalence study is required to understand the current epidemiology of diabetes in the maltese islands . the significant societal transitions being experienced also leave an impact on the epidemiology of diabetes . a special focus on distribution of diabetes in society will be incorporated in the prevalence study in order to investigate any inequalities and high-risk areas or population subgroups . this will enable better planning for health services in the area of diabetes as well as economic modelling related to the projected burden of disease . a diabetes prevalence study has been conducted in 2015. the findings from this study will serve to inform further actions and priorities in the coming years in the area of diabetes . innovative models of health promotion and health services organization and delivery for persons with diabetes need to be developed in order to achieve better results and outcomes for individuals and for society as a whole . these include research on the use of technology , including ict , to deliver enhanced preventive and supportive services for persons with diabetes . there is a pressing need to establish the necessary infrastructure for surveillance of diabetes at a national level . whilst for other chronic illnesses such as cancer , the existence of a truly national register for the past twenty years has allowed the reasonably accurate monitoring of incidence and outcomes this has yet to be developed for diabetes . a system of surveillance enables epidemiological trends to become immediately visible such that an appropriate response may be carried out in terms of service planning as well as public health interventions . it may also help to shed light on possible aetiological factors . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a disease that occurs when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is your main source of energy and comes from the food you eat . insulin , a hormone made by the pancreas , helps glucose from food get into your cells to be used for energy . sometimes your body doesn ’ t make enough—or any—insulin or doesn ’ t use insulin well . glucose then stays in your blood and doesn ’ t reach your cells . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . although diabetes has no cure , you can take steps to manage your diabetes and stay healthy . sometimes people call diabetes “ a touch of sugar ” or “ borderline diabetes . ” these terms suggest that someone doesn ’ t really have diabetes or has a less serious case , but every case of diabetes is serious . what are the different types of diabetes ? the most common types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . type 1 diabetes if you have type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin . your immune system attacks and destroys the cells in your pancreas that make insulin . type 1 diabetes is usually diagnosed in children and young adults , although it can appear at any age . people with type 1 diabetes need to take insulin every day to stay alive . type 2 diabetes : if you have type 2 diabetes , your body does not make or use insulin well . you can develop type 2 diabetes at any age , even during childhood . however , this type of diabetes occurs most often in middle-aged and older people . type 2 is the most common type of diabetes . gestational diabetes gestational diabetes develops in some women when they are pregnant . most of the time , this type of diabetes goes away after the baby is born . however , if you ’ ve had gestational diabetes , you have a greater chance of developing type 2 diabetes later in life . sometimes diabetes diagnosed during pregnancy is actually type 2 diabetes . other types of diabetes : less common types include monogenic diabetes , which is an inherited form of diabetes , and cystic fibrosis-related diabetes . how common is diabetes ? as of 2015 , 30.3 million people in the united states , or 9.4 percent of the population , had diabetes . more than 1 in 4 of them didn ’ t know they had the disease . diabetes affects 1 in 4 people over the age of 65. about 90-95 percent of cases in adults are type 2 diabetes . who is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes ? you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are age 45 or older , have a family history of diabetes , or are overweight . physical inactivity , race , and certain health problems such as high blood pressure also affect your chance of developing type 2 diabetes . you are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you have prediabetes or had gestational diabetes when you were pregnant . what health problems can people with diabetes develop ? over time , high blood glucose leads to problems such as heart disease , stroke , kidney disease , eye problems , dental disease , nerve damage , and foot problems . symptoms & causes : what are the symptoms of diabetes ? symptoms of diabetes include increased thirst and urination , increased hunger , fatigue , blurred vision , numbness or tingling in the feet or hands , sores that do not heal , and unexplained weight loss . symptoms of type 1 diabetes can start quickly , in a matter of weeks . symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly over the course of several years and can be so mild that you might not even notice them . many people with type 2 diabetes have no symptoms . some people do not find out they have the disease until they have diabetes-related health problems , such as blurred vision or heart trouble . what causes type 1 diabetes ? type 1 diabetes occurs when your immune system , the body 's system for fighting infection , attacks and destroys the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas . scientists think type 1 diabetes is caused by genes and environmental factors , such as viruses , that might trigger the disease . studies such as trialnet are working to pinpoint causes of type 1 diabetes and possible ways to prevent or slow the disease . what causes type 2 diabetes ? type 2 diabetes—the most common form of diabetes—is caused by several factors , including lifestyle factors and genes . overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity : you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are not physically active and are overweight or obese . extra weight sometimes causes insulin resistance and is common in people with type 2 diabetes . the location of body fat also makes a difference . extra belly fat is linked to insulin resistance , type 2 diabetes , and heart and blood vessel disease . to see if your weight puts you at risk for type 2 diabetes , check out these body mass index ( bmi ) charts . insulin resistance : type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance , a condition in which muscle , liver , and fat cells do not use insulin well . as a result , your body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas makes more insulin to keep up with the added demand . over time , the pancreas ca n't make enough insulin , and blood glucose levels rise . genes and family history : as in type 1 diabetes , certain genes may make you more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . the disease tends to run in families and occurs more often in these racial/ethnic groups : african americans , alaska natives , american indians , asian americans , hispanics/latinos , native hawaiians , pacific islanders . genes also can increase the risk of type 2 diabetes by increasing a person 's tendency to become overweight or obese . what causes gestational diabetes ? scientists believe gestational diabetes , a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy , is caused by the hormonal changes of pregnancy along with genetic and lifestyle factors . insulin resistance : hormones produced by the placenta contribute to insulin resistance , which occurs in all women during late pregnancy . most pregnant women can produce enough insulin to overcome insulin resistance , but some can not . gestational diabetes occurs when the pancreas ca n't make enough insulin . as with type 2 diabetes , extra weight is linked to gestational diabetes . women who are overweight or obese may already have insulin resistance when they become pregnant . gaining too much weight during pregnancy may also be a factor . genes and family history : having a family history of diabetes makes it more likely that a woman will develop gestational diabetes , which suggests that genes play a role . genes may also explain why the disorder occurs more often in african americans , american indians , asians , and hispanics/latinas . what else can cause diabetes ? genetic mutations , other diseases , damage to the pancreas , and certain medicines may also cause diabetes . genetic mutations , hormonal changes , extra weight , and family history can contribute to gestational diabetes . monogenic diabetes is caused by mutations , or changes , in a single gene . these changes are usually passed through families , but sometimes the gene mutation happens on its own . most of these gene mutations cause diabetes by making the pancreas less able to make insulin . the most common types of monogenic diabetes are neonatal diabetes and maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) . neonatal diabetes occurs in the first 6 months of life . doctors usually diagnose mody during adolescence or early adulthood , but sometimes the disease is not diagnosed until later in life . cystic fibrosis produces thick mucus that causes scarring in the pancreas . this scarring can prevent the pancreas from making enough insulin . hemochromatosis causes the body to store too much iron . if the disease is not treated , iron can build up in and damage the pancreas and other organs . hormonal diseases : some hormonal diseases cause the body to produce too much of certain hormones , which sometimes cause insulin resistance and diabetes . cushing 's syndrome occurs when the body produces too much cortisol—often called the stress hormone . acromegaly occurs when the body produces too much growth hormone . hyperthyroidism occurs when the thyroid gland produces too much thyroid hormone . damage to or removal of the pancreas : pancreatitis , pancreatic cancer , and trauma can all harm the beta cells or make them less able to produce insulin , resulting in diabetes . if the damaged pancreas is removed , diabetes will occur due to the loss of the beta cells . medicines : sometimes certain medicines can harm beta cells or disrupt the way insulin works . these include niacin , a type of vitamin b3 ; certain types of diuretics , also called water pills ; anti-seizure drugs ; psychiatric drugs ; drugs to treat human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) ; pentamidine , a drug used to treat a type of pneumonia ; glucocorticoids—medicines used to treat inflammatory illnesses such as rheumatoid arthritis , asthma , lupus , and ulcerative colitis ; anti-rejection medicines , used to help stop the body from rejecting a transplanted organ ; statins , which are medicines to reduce ldl ( bad ) cholesterol levels , can slightly increase the chance that you 'll develop diabetes . however , statins help protect you from heart disease and stroke . for this reason , the strong benefits of taking statins outweigh the small chance that you could develop diabetes . if you take any of these medicines and are concerned about their side effects , talk with your doctor . risk factors for type 2 diabetes your chances of developing type 2 diabetes depend on a combination of risk factors such as your genes and lifestyle . although you ca n't change risk factors such as family history , age , or ethnicity , you can change lifestyle risk factors around eating , physical activity , and weight . these lifestyle changes can affect your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . read about risk factors for type 2 diabetes below and see which ones apply to you . taking action on the factors you can change can help you delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are overweight or obese , are age 45 or older , have a family history of diabetes , are african american , alaska native , american indian , asian american , hispanic/latino , native hawaiian , or pacific islander , have high blood pressure , have a low level of hdl ( good ) cholesterol , or a high level of triglycerides , have a history of gestational diabetes or gave birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more , are not physically active , have a history of heart disease or stroke , have depression , have polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) , have acanthosis nigricans—dark , thick , and velvety skin around your neck or armpits . you can also take the diabetes risk test to learn about your risk for type 2 diabetes . to see if your weight puts you at risk for type 2 diabetes , find your height in the body mass index ( bmi ) charts below . if your weight is equal to or more than the weight listed , you have a greater chance of developing the disease . what can i do to prevent type 2 diabetes ? you can take steps to help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by losing weight if you are overweight , eating fewer calories , and being more physically active . talk with your health care professional about any of the health conditions listed above that may require medical treatment . managing these health problems may help reduce your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . also , ask your health care professional about ways to reduce your risk of type 2 diabetes , such as : maintain a healthy weight : if you are overweight , losing even a small amount of weight ( 5-10 % of your total body weight ) can significantly reduce your risk . healthy eating : adopt a balanced and nutritious diet . focus on whole foods , such as fruits , vegetables , whole grains , lean proteins , and healthy fats . limit your intake of processed foods , sugary beverages , and high-calorie snacks . regular physical activity : engage in regular physical activity , such as brisk walking , jogging , swimming , or cycling . aim for at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week . monitor blood sugar levels : if you have prediabetes , work with your health care team to monitor your blood sugar levels regularly . this can help you make necessary lifestyle changes and , if needed , start medication to manage your blood sugar . also , ask your healthcare professional about any medicines you take that might increase your risk . preventing type 2 diabetes : perhaps you have learned that you have a high chance of developing type 2 diabetes , the most common type of diabetes . you might be overweight or have a parent , brother , or sister with type 2 diabetes . maybe you had gestational diabetes , which is diabetes that develops during pregnancy . these are just a few examples of factors that can raise your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . diabetes can cause serious health problems , such as heart disease , stroke , and eye and foot problems . prediabetes also can cause health problems . the good news is that type 2 diabetes can be delayed or even prevented . the longer you have diabetes , the more likely you are to develop health problems , so delaying diabetes by even a few years will benefit your health . you can help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by losing a modest amount of weight by following a reduced-calorie eating plan and being physically active most days of the week . ask your doctor if you should take the diabetes drug metformin to help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes . how can i lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes ? research , such as the diabetes prevention program , shows that you can do a lot to reduce your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . here are some things you can change to lower your risk : lose weight and keep it off . you may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 7 percent of your starting weight . for instance , if you weigh 200 pounds , your goal would be to lose about 10 to 14 pounds . move more . get at least 30 minutes of physical activity 5 days a week . if you have not been active , talk with your healthcare professional about which activities are best . start slowly to build up to your goal . eat healthy foods most of the time . eat smaller portions to reduce the amount of calories you eat each day and help you lose weight . choosing foods with less fat is another way to reduce calories . drink water instead of sweetened beverages . ask your healthcare professional about what other changes you can make to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes . most often , your best chance for preventing type 2 diabetes is to make lifestyle changes that work for you long term . get started with your game plan to prevent type 2 diabetes . losing weight through healthy eating and regular physical activity can help you prevent type 2 diabetes . what should i do if my healthcare professional told me i have prediabetes ? prediabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes . having prediabetes is serious because it raises your chance of developing type 2 diabetes . many of the same factors that raise your chance of developing type 2 diabetes put you at risk for prediabetes . other names for prediabetes include impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance . some people call prediabetes borderline diabetes . about 1 in 3 americans has prediabetes , according to recent diabetes statistics from the centers for disease control and prevention . you wo n't know if you have prediabetes unless you are tested . if you have prediabetes , you can lower your chance of developing type 2 diabetes . lose weight if you need to , become more physically active , and follow a reduced-calorie eating plan . get started with your game plan to prevent type 2 diabetes . for more support , you can find a lifestyle change program near you through the national diabetes prevention program . if i had gestational diabetes when i was pregnant , how can i lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes ? gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy . most of the time , gestational diabetes goes away after your baby is born . even if your gestational diabetes goes away , you still have a greater chance of developing type 2 diabetes within 5 to 10 years . your child may also be more likely to become obese and develop type 2 diabetes later in life . making healthy choices helps the whole family and may protect your child from becoming obese or developing diabetes . get tested for diabetes 6 to 12 weeks after your baby is born . if your blood glucose is still high , you may have type 2 diabetes . if your blood glucose is normal , you should get tested every 3 years to see if you have developed type 2 diabetes . be more active and make healthy food choices to get back to a healthy weight . breastfeed your baby . breastfeeding gives your baby the right balance of nutrients and helps you burn calories . ask your doctor if you should take the diabetes drug metformin to help prevent type 2 diabetes . references : diabetes prevention program research group . long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up : the diabetes prevention program outcomes study . being physically active together is a great way to lower your own and your child 's chance of developing type 2 diabetes . diabetes prevention program research group . long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up : the diabetes prevention program outcomes study . diabetes tests & diagnosis : your healthcare professional can diagnose diabetes , prediabetes , and gestational diabetes through blood tests . the blood tests show if your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . do not try to diagnose yourself if you think you might have diabetes . testing equipment that you can buy over the counter , such as a blood glucose meter , can not diagnose diabetes . who should be tested for diabetes ? anyone who has symptoms of diabetes should be tested for the disease . some people will not have any symptoms but may have risk factors for diabetes and need to be tested . testing allows healthcare professionals to find diabetes sooner and work with their patients to manage diabetes and prevent complications . testing also allows healthcare professionals to find prediabetes . making lifestyle changes to lose a modest amount of weight if you are overweight may help you delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . type 1 diabetes : most often , testing for occurs in people with diabetes symptoms . doctors usually diagnose type 1 diabetes in children and young adults . because type 1 diabetes can run in families , a study called trialnet offers free testing to family members of people with the disease , even if they do n't have symptoms . blood tests help healthcare professionals diagnose diabetes and prediabetes . type 2 diabetes : experts recommend routine testing for type 2 diabetes if you are age 45 or older , are between the ages of 19 and 44 , are overweight or obese , and have one or more other diabetes risk factors . if you are a woman who had gestational diabetes , medicare covers the cost of diabetes tests for people with certain risk factors for diabetes . if you have medicare , find out if you qualify for coverage . if you have different insurance , ask your insurance company if it covers diabetes tests . though type 2 diabetes most often develops in adults , children also can develop type 2 diabetes . experts recommend testing children between the ages of 10 and 18 who are overweight or obese and have at least two other risk factors for developing diabetes . low birthweight , a mother who had diabetes while pregnant with them , any risk factor mentioned in risk factors for type 2 diabetes , gestational diabetes : all pregnant women who do not have a prior diabetes diagnosis should be tested for gestational diabetes . if you are pregnant , you will take a glucose challenge test between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy . what tests are used to diagnose diabetes and prediabetes ? healthcare professionals most often use the fasting plasma glucose ( fpg ) test or the a1c test to diagnose diabetes . in some cases , they may use a random plasma glucose ( rpg ) test . fasting plasma glucose ( fpg ) test : the fpg blood test measures your blood glucose level at a single point in time . for the most reliable results , it is best to have this test in the morning , after you fast for at least 8 hours . fasting means having nothing to eat or drink except sips of water . a1c test : the a1c test is a blood test that provides your average levels of blood glucose over the past 3 months . other names for the a1c test are hemoglobin a1c , hba1c , glycated hemoglobin , and glycosylated hemoglobin test . you can eat and drink before this test . when it comes to using the a1c to diagnose diabetes , your doctor will consider factors such as your age and whether you have anemia or another problem with your blood . the a1c test is not accurate in people with anemia . if you 're of african , mediterranean , or southeast asian descent , your a1c test results may be falsely high or low . your healthcare professional may need to order a different type of a1c test . your healthcare professional will report your a1c test result as a percentage , such as an a1c of 7 percent . the higher the percentage , the higher your average blood glucose levels . people with diabetes also use information from the a1c test to help manage their diabetes . random plasma glucose ( rpg ) test : sometimes healthcare professionals use the rpg test to diagnose diabetes when diabetes symptoms are present and they do not want to wait until you have fasted . you do not need to fast overnight for the rpg test . you may have this blood test at any time . what tests are used to diagnose gestational diabetes ? pregnant women may have the glucose challenge test , the oral glucose tolerance test , or both . these tests show how well your body handles glucose . glucose challenge test : if you are pregnant and a healthcare professional is checking you for gestational diabetes , you may first receive the glucose challenge test . another name for this test is the glucose screening test . in this test , a healthcare professional will draw your blood 1 hour after you drink a sweet liquid containing glucose . you do not need to fast for this test . if your blood glucose is too high ( 135 to 140 or more ) , you may need to return for an oral glucose tolerance test while fasting . oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : the ogtt measures blood glucose after you fast for at least 8 hours . first , a healthcare professional will draw your blood . then you will drink the liquid containing glucose . for diagnosing gestational diabetes , you will need your blood drawn every hour for 2 to 3 hours . high blood glucose levels at any two or more blood test times during the ogtt—fasting , 1 hour , 2 hours , or 3 hours—mean you have gestational diabetes . your health care team will explain what your ogtt results mean . healthcare professionals also can use the ogtt to diagnose type 2 diabetes and prediabetes in people who are not pregnant . the ogtt helps healthcare professionals detect type 2 diabetes and prediabetes better than the fpg test . however , the ogtt is a more expensive test and is not as easy to give . to diagnose type 2 diabetes and prediabetes , a healthcare professional will need to draw your blood 1 hour after you drink the liquid containing glucose and again after 2 hours . what test numbers tell me if i have diabetes or prediabetes ? each test to detect diabetes and prediabetes uses a different measurement . usually , the same test method needs to be repeated on a second day to diagnose diabetes . your doctor may also use a second test method to confirm that you have diabetes . to diagnose gestational diabetes , healthcare professionals give more glucose to drink and use different numbers as cutoffs . source : adapted from american diabetes association . classification and diagnosis of diabetes . which tests help my healthcare professional know what kind of diabetes i have ? even though the tests described here can confirm that you have diabetes , they ca n't identify what type you have . sometimes healthcare professionals are unsure if diabetes is type 1 or type 2. a rare type of diabetes that can occur in babies , called monogenic diabetes can also be mistaken for type 1 diabetes . treatment depends on the type of diabetes , so knowing which type you have is important . to find out if your diabetes is type 1 , your healthcare professional may look for certain autoantibodies . autoantibodies are antibodies that mistakenly attack your healthy tissues and cells . the presence of one or more of several types of autoantibodies specific to diabetes is common in type 1 diabetes , but not in type 2 or monogenic diabetes . a healthcare professional will have to draw your blood for this test . if you had diabetes while you were pregnant , you should get tested 6 to 12 weeks after your baby is born to see if you have type 2 diabetes . managing diabetes : you can manage your diabetes and live a long and healthy life by taking care of yourself each day . diabetes can affect almost every part of your body . therefore , you will need to manage your blood glucose levels , also called blood sugar . how can i manage my diabetes ? with the help of your health care team , you can create a diabetes self-care plan to manage your diabetes . your self-care plan may include these steps : manage your diabetes abcs ; follow your diabetes meal plan ; make physical activity part of your routine ; take your medicine ; check your blood glucose levels ; work with your health care team ; cope with your diabetes in healthy ways ; manage your diabetes abcs ; knowing your diabetes abcs will help you manage your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol . stopping smoking if you smoke will also help you manage your diabetes . working toward your abc goals can help lower your chances of having a heart attack , stroke , or other diabetes problems . for the a1c test : the a1c test shows your average blood glucose level over the past 3 months . the a1c goal for many people with diabetes is below 7 percent . ask your health care team what your goal should be . for blood pressure : the blood pressure goal for most people with diabetes is below 140/90 mm hg . ask what your goal should be . for cholesterol : you have two kinds of cholesterol in your blood : ldl and hdl . ldl or bad cholesterol can build up and clog your blood vessels . too much bad cholesterol can cause a heart attack or stroke . hdl or good cholesterol helps remove the bad cholesterol from your blood vessels . ask your health care team what your cholesterol numbers should be . if you are over 40 years of age , you may need to take a statin drug for heart health . for stop smoking : not smoking is especially important for people with diabetes because both smoking and diabetes narrow blood vessels . blood vessel narrowing makes your heart work harder . e-cigarettes are n't a safe option either . if you quit smoking , you will lower your risk for heart attack , stroke , nerve disease , kidney disease , diabetic eye disease , and amputation . your cholesterol and blood pressure levels may improve , and your blood circulation will improve . you may have an easier time being physically active . if you smoke or use other tobacco products , stop . ask for help so you do n't have to do it alone . keeping your a1c , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels close to your goals and stopping smoking may help prevent the long-term harmful effects of diabetes . these health problems include heart disease , stroke , kidney disease , nerve damage , and eye disease . you can keep track of your abcs with a diabetes care record . take it with you on your health care visits . talk about your goals and how you are doing , and whether you need to make any changes in your diabetes care plan . follow your diabetes meal plan : make a diabetes meal plan with help from your health care team . following a meal plan will help you manage your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol . choose fruits and vegetables , beans , whole grains , chicken or turkey without the skin , fish , lean meats , and nonfat or low-fat milk and cheese . drink water instead of sugar-sweetened beverages . choose foods that are lower in calories , saturated fat , trans fat , sugar , and salt . learn more about eating , diet , and nutrition with diabetes . make physical activity part of your daily routine : set a goal to be more physically active . try to work up to 30 minutes or more of physical activity on most days of the week . brisk walking and swimming are good ways to move more . if you are not active now , ask your health care team about the types and amounts of physical activity that are right for you . learn more about being physically active with diabetes . following your meal plan and being more active can help you stay at or get to a healthy weight . if you are overweight or obese , work with your health care team to create a weight-loss plan that is right for you . take your medicine : take your medicines for diabetes and any other health problems , even when you feel good or have reached your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol goals . these medicines help you manage your abcs . ask your doctor if you need to take aspirin to prevent a heart attack or stroke . tell your health care professional if you can not afford your medicines or if you have any side effects from your medicines . learn more about insulin and other diabetes medicines . swimming or water walking is a good way to move more . check your blood glucose levels : for many people with diabetes , checking their blood glucose level each day is an important way to manage their diabetes . monitoring your blood glucose level is most important if you take insulin . the results of blood glucose monitoring can help you make decisions about food , physical activity , and medicines . the most common way to check your blood glucose level at home is with a blood glucose meter . you get a drop of blood by pricking the side of your fingertip with a lancet . then you apply the blood to a test strip . the meter will show you how much glucose is in your blood at the moment . ask your health care team how often you should check your blood glucose levels . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . you can print copies of this glucose self-check chart . take these records with you when you visit your health care team . what is continuous glucose monitoring ? continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) is another way to check your glucose levels . most cgm systems use a tiny sensor that you insert under your skin . the sensor measures glucose levels in the fluids between your body 's cells every few minutes and can show changes in your glucose level throughout the day and night . if the cgm system shows that your glucose is too high or too low , you should check your glucose with a blood glucose meter before making any changes to your checking and recording your blood glucose level is an important part of managing diabetes . eating plan , physical activity , or medicines . a cgm system is especially useful for people who use insulin and have problems with low blood glucose . what are the recommended targets for blood glucose levels ? many people with diabetes aim to keep their blood glucose at these normal levels : before a meal : 80 to 130 mg/dl about 2 hours after a meal starts : less than 180 mg/dl . talk with your health care team about the best target range for you . be sure to tell your health care professional if your glucose levels often go above or below your target range . what happens if my blood glucose level becomes too low ? sometimes blood glucose levels drop below where they should be , which is called hypoglycemia . for most people with diabetes , the blood glucose level is too low when it is below 70 mg/dl . hypoglycemia can be life-threatening and needs to be treated right away . learn more about how to recognize and treat hypoglycemia . what happens if my blood glucose level becomes too high ? doctors call high blood glucose hyperglycemia . symptoms that your blood glucose levels may be too high include : feeling thirsty ; feeling tired or weak ; headaches ; urinating often ; blurred vision . if you often have high blood glucose levels or symptoms of high blood glucose , talk with your health care team . you may need a change in your diabetes meal plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . know when to check for ketones . your doctor may want you to check your urine for ketones if you have symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis . when ketone levels get too high , you can develop this life-threatening condition . symptoms include : trouble breathing ; nausea or vomiting ; pain in your abdomen ; confusion ; feeling very tired or sleepy . ketoacidosis most often is a problem for people with type 1 diabetes . work with your health care team . most people with diabetes get health care from a primary care professional . primary care professionals include internists , family physicians , and pediatricians . sometimes physician assistants and nurses with extra training , called nurse practitioners , provide primary care . you also will need to see other care professionals from time to time . a team of health care professionals can help you improve your diabetes self-care . remember , you are the most important member of your health care team . besides a primary care professional , your health care team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care , a registered dietitian , also called a nutritionist , a nurse , a certified diabetes educator , a pharmacist , a dentist , an eye doctor , a podiatrist , or foot doctor , for foot care , a social worker , who can help you find financial aid for treatment and community resources , a counselor , or other mental health care professional . when you see members of your health care team , ask questions . write a list of questions you have before your visit so you do n't forget what you want to ask . watch a video to help you get ready for your diabetes care visit . you should see your health care team at least twice a year , and more often if you are having problems or are having trouble reaching your blood glucose , blood pressure , or cholesterol goals . at each visit , be sure you have a blood pressure check , foot check , and weight check ; and review your self-care plan . talk with your health care team about your medicines and whether you need to adjust them . routine health care will help you find and treat any health problems early or may be able to help prevent them . talk with your doctor about what vaccines you should get to keep from getting sick , such as a flu shot and pneumonia shot . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . your blood glucose levels are more likely to go up when you 're sick or have an infection . learn more about taking care of your diabetes when you 're sick and during other special times , such as when you 're traveling . cope with your diabetes in healthy ways : feeling stressed , sad , or angry is common when you live with diabetes . stress can raise your blood glucose levels , but you can learn ways to lower your stress . try deep breathing , gardening , taking a walk , doing yoga , meditating , doing a hobby , or listening to your favorite music . consider taking part in a diabetes education program or support group that teaches you techniques for managing stress . learn more about healthy ways to cope with stress . depression is common among people with a chronic , or long-term , illness . depression can get in the way of your efforts to manage your diabetes . ask for help if you feel down . a mental health counselor , support group , clergy member , friend , or family member who will listen to your feelings may help you feel better . try to get 7 to 8 hours of sleep each night . getting enough sleep can help improve your mood and energy level . you can take steps to improve your sleep habits . if you often feel sleepy during the day , you may have obstructive sleep apnea , a condition in which your breathing briefly stops many times during the night . sleep apnea is common in people who have diabetes . talk with your health care team if you think you have a sleep problem . remember , managing diabetes is n't easy , but it 's worth it . insulin , medicines , & other diabetes treatments : taking insulin or other diabetes medicines is often part of treating diabetes . along with healthy food choices and physical activity , medicine can help you manage the disease . some other treatment options are also available . what medicines might i take for diabetes ? the medicine you take will vary by your type of diabetes and how well the medicine controls your blood glucose levels , also called blood sugar . other factors , such as your other health conditions , medication costs , and your daily schedule , may play a role in what diabetes medicine you take . type 1 diabetes : if you have type 1 diabetes , you must take insulin because your body no longer makes this hormone . you will need to take insulin several times during the day , including with meals . you could also use an insulin pump , which gives you small , steady doses throughout the day . type 2 diabetes : some people with type 2 diabetes can manage their disease by making healthy food choices and being more physically active . many people with type 2 diabetes need diabetes medicines as well . these medicines may include diabetes pills or medicines you inject under your skin , such as insulin . in time , you may need more than one diabetes medicine to control your blood glucose . even if you do not take insulin , you may need it at special times , such as during pregnancy or if you are in the hospital . gestational diabetes : if you have gestational diabetes , you should first try to control your blood glucose level by making healthy food choices and getting regular physical activity . if you ca n't reach your blood glucose target , your health care team will talk with you about diabetes medicines , such as insulin or the diabetes pill metformin , that may be safe for you to take during pregnancy . your health care team may start you on diabetes medicines right away if your blood glucose is very high . no matter what type of diabetes you have , taking diabetes medicines every day can feel like a burden sometimes . you may also need medicines for other health problems , such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol , as part of your diabetes care plan . view resources that may help you manage your medication plan . what are the different types of insulin ? several types of insulin are available . each type starts to work at a different speed , known as onset , and its effects last a different length of time , known as duration . most types of insulin reach a peak , which is when they have the strongest effect . then the effects of the insulin wear off over the next few hours or so . types of insulin and how they work : rapid-acting : about 15 minutes after injection ; 1 hour peak ; 2 to 4 hours duration . short-acting , also called regular : within 30 minutes after injection ; 2 to 3 hours peak ; 3 to 6 hours duration . intermediate-acting : 2 to 4 hours after injection ; 4 to 12 hours peak ; 12 to 18 hours duration . long-acting : several hours after injection ; does not peak ; 24 hours duration ; some last longer . the chart above gives averages . follow your doctor 's advice on when and how to take your insulin . your doctor might also recommend premixed insulin , which is a mix of two types of insulin . some types of insulin cost more than others , so talk with your doctor about your options if you 're concerned about cost . what are the different ways to take insulin ? the way you take insulin may depend on your lifestyle , insurance plan , and preferences . you may decide that needles are not for you and prefer a different method . talk with your doctor about the options and which is best for you . most people with diabetes use a needle and syringe , pen , or insulin pump . inhalers , injection ports , and jet injectors are less common . needle and syringe : you 'll give yourself insulin shots using a needle and syringe . you will draw up your dose of insulin from the vial , or bottle , into the syringe . insulin works fastest when you inject it in your belly , but you should rotate spots where you inject insulin . other injection spots include your thigh , buttocks , or upper arm . some people with diabetes who take insulin need two to four shots a day to reach their blood glucose targets . others can take a single shot . pen : an insulin pen looks like a pen but has a needle for its point . some insulin pens come filled with insulin and are disposable . others have room for an insulin cartridge that you insert and then replace after use . insulin pens cost more than needles and syringes , but many people find them easier to use . insulin shots involve drawing insulin from a vial into a syringe and then injecting it under your skin . pump : an insulin pump is a small machine that gives you small , steady doses of insulin throughout the day . you wear one type of pump outside your body on a belt or in a pocket or pouch . the insulin pump connects to a small plastic tube and a very small needle . you insert the needle under your skin , and it stays in place for several days . insulin then pumps from the machine through the tube into your body 24 hours a day . you also can give yourself doses of insulin through the pump at mealtimes . another type of pump has no tubes and attaches directly to your skin , such as a self-adhesive pod . an insulin pen is a convenient way to take insulin ; insulin pumps deliver insulin 24 hours a day . inhaler : another way to take insulin is by breathing powdered insulin from an inhaler device into your mouth . the insulin goes into your lungs and moves quickly into your blood . inhaled insulin is only for adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes . injection port : an injection port has a short tube that you insert into the tissue beneath your skin . on the skin 's surface , an adhesive patch or dressing holds the port in place . you inject insulin through the port with a needle and syringe or an insulin pen . the port stays in place for a few days , and then you replace the port . with an injection port , you no longer puncture your skin for each shot—only when you apply a new port . jet injector : this device sends a fine spray of insulin into the skin at high pressure instead of using a needle to deliver the insulin . what oral medicines treat type 2 diabetes ? you may need medicines along with healthy eating and physical activity habits to manage your type 2 diabetes . you can take many diabetes medicines by mouth . these medicines are called oral medicines . most people with type 2 diabetes start medical treatment with metformin pills . metformin also comes as a liquid . metformin lowers the amount of glucose that your liver makes and helps your body use insulin better . this drug may help you lose a small amount of weight . other oral medicines act in different ways to lower blood glucose levels . you may need to add another diabetes medicine after a while or use a combination treatment . combining two or three kinds of diabetes medicines can lower blood glucose levels more than taking just one . read about different kinds of diabetes medicines from the food and drug administration ( fda ) . what other injectable medicines treat type 2 diabetes ? besides insulin , other types of injected medicines are available . these medicines help keep your blood glucose level from going too high after you eat . they may make you feel less hungry and help you lose some weight . other injectable medicines are not substitutes for insulin . learn more about noninsulin injectable medicines . what should i know about side effects of diabetes medicines ? side effects are problems that result from a medicine . some diabetes medicines can cause hypoglycemia , also called low blood glucose , if you do n't balance your medicines with food and activity . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicine can cause hypoglycemia or other side effects , such as upset stomach and weight gain . take your diabetes medicines as your health care professional has instructed you , to help prevent side effects and diabetes problems . do i have other treatment options for my diabetes ? when medicines and lifestyle changes are not enough to manage your diabetes , a less common treatment may be an option . other treatments include bariatric surgery for certain people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes , an `` artificial pancreas , `` and pancreatic islet transplantation for some people with type 1 diabetes . bariatric surgery : also called weight-loss surgery or metabolic surgery , bariatric surgery may help some people with obesity and type 2 diabetes lose a large amount of weight and regain normal blood glucose levels . some people with diabetes may no longer need their diabetes medicine after bariatric surgery . whether and for how long blood glucose levels improve seems to vary by the patient , type of weight-loss surgery , and amount of weight the person loses . other factors include how long someone has had diabetes and whether or not the person uses insulin . recent research suggests that weight-loss surgery also may help improve blood glucose control in people with type 1 diabetes who are obese . researchers are studying the long-term results of bariatric surgery in people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes . artificial pancreas : the niddk has played an important role in developing artificial pancreas technology . an artificial pancreas replaces manual blood glucose testing and the use of insulin shots or a pump . a single system monitors blood glucose levels around the clock and provides insulin or a combination of insulin and a second hormone , glucagon , automatically . the system can also be monitored remotely , for example , by parents or medical staff . in 2016 , the fda approved a type of artificial pancreas system called a hybrid closed-loop system . this system tests your glucose level every 5 minutes throughout the day and night and automatically gives you the right amount of insulin . you still need to manually adjust the amount of insulin the pump delivers at mealtimes . but , the artificial pancreas may free you from some of the daily tasks needed to keep your blood glucose stable—or help you sleep through the night without the need to wake and test your glucose or take medicine . the hybrid closed-loop system is expected to be available in the u.s. in 2017. talk with your health care provider about whether this system might be right for you . the niddk has funded several important studies on different types of artificial pancreas devices to better help people with type 1 diabetes manage their disease . the devices may also help people with type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes . pancreatic islet transplantation : pancreatic islet transplantation is an experimental treatment for poorly controlled type 1 diabetes . pancreatic islets are clusters of cells in the pancreas that make the hormone insulin . in type 1 diabetes , the body 's immune system attacks these cells . a pancreatic islet transplant replaces destroyed islets with new ones that make and release insulin . this procedure takes islets from the pancreas of an organ donor and transfers them to a person with type 1 diabetes . because researchers are still studying pancreatic islet transplantation , the procedure is only available to people enrolled in research studies . learn more about islet transplantation studies . becoming more active and making changes in what you eat and drink can seem challenging at first . you may find it easier to start with small changes and get help from your family , friends , and health care team . eating well and being physically active most days of the week can help you keep your blood glucose level , blood pressure , and cholesterol in your target ranges ; lose weight or stay at a healthy weight ; prevent or delay diabetes problems ; and feel good and have more energy . what foods can i eat if i have diabetes ? you may worry that having diabetes means going without foods you enjoy . the good news is that you can still eat your favorite foods , but you might need to eat smaller portions or enjoy them less often . your health care team will help create a diabetes meal plan for you that meets your needs and likes . the key to eating with diabetes is to eat a variety of healthy foods from all food groups , in the amounts your meal plan outlines . the food groups are : vegetables ( nonstarchy ) : includes broccoli , carrots , greens , peppers , and tomatoes . vegetables ( starchy ) : includes potatoes , corn , and green peas . fruits : includes oranges , melon , berries , apples , bananas , and grapes . grains : at least half of your grains for the day should be whole grains , includes wheat , rice , oats , cornmeal , barley , and quinoa . examples : bread , pasta , cereal , and tortillas . protein : lean meat , chicken or turkey without the skin , fish , eggs , nuts and peanuts , dried beans , and certain peas , such as chickpeas and split peas . meat substitutes , such as tofu . dairy : nonfat or low-fat milk or lactose-free milk if you have lactose intolerance , yogurt , cheese . eat foods with heart-healthy fats , which mainly come from these foods : oils that are liquid at room temperature , such as canola and olive oil ; nuts and seeds ; heart-healthy fish such as salmon , tuna , and mackerel ; avocado . use oils when cooking food instead of butter , cream , shortening , lard , or stick margarine . what foods and drinks should i limit if i have diabetes ? foods and drinks to limit include fried foods and other foods high in saturated fat and trans fat foods high in salt , also called sodium sweets , such as baked goods , candy , and ice cream beverages with added sugars , such as juice , regular soda , and regular sports or energy drinks drink water instead of sweetened beverages . consider using a sugar substitute in your coffee or tea . if you drink alcohol , drink moderately more than one drink a day if you ’ re a woman or two drinks a day if you ’ re a man . if you use insulin or diabetes medicines that increase the amount of insulin your body makes , alcohol can make your blood glucose level drop too low . this is especially true if you haven ’ t eaten in a while . its best to eat some food when you drink alcohol . choose healthy fats , such as from nuts , seeds , and olive oil . when should i eat if i have diabetes ? some people with diabetes need to eat at about the same time each day , while others can be more flexible with the timing of their meals . depending on your diabetes medicines or type of insulin , you may need to eat the same amount of carbohydrates at the same time each day . if you take mealtime insulin , your eating schedule can be more flexible . if you use certain diabetes medicines or insulin and you skip or delay a meal , your blood glucose level can drop too low . ask your health care team when you should eat and whether you should eat before and after physical activity . how much can i eat if i have diabetes ? eating the right amount of food will also help you manage your blood glucose level and your weight . your health care team can help you figure out how much food and how many calories you should eat each day . look up how many calories are in what you eat and drink at the usda 's food-a-pedia . weight-loss planning : if you are overweight or obese , work with your health care team to create a weight-loss plan . these tools may help : the body weight planner can assist you in tailoring your plans to reach and maintain your goal weight . the super tracker allows you to track your food , physical activity , and weight . to lose weight , you need to eat fewer calories and replace less healthy foods with foods lower in calories , fat , and sugar . if you have diabetes , are overweight or obese , and are planning to have a baby , you should try to lose any excess weight before you become pregnant . learn more about planning for pregnancy if you have diabetes . meal plan methods : two common ways to help you plan how much to eat if you have diabetes are the plate method and carbohydrate counting , also called carb counting . check with your health care team about the method that 's best for you . plate method : the plate method helps you control your portion sizes , and you do n't need to count calories . the plate method shows the amount of each food group you should eat . this method works best for lunch and dinner . use a 9-inch plate , placing non starchy vegetables on half of the plate , a meat or other protein on one-fourth of the plate , and a grain or other starch on the last one-fourth . starches include starchy vegetables such as corn and peas . you may also eat a small bowl of fruit or a piece of fruit , and drink a small glass of milk as included in your meal plan . you can find many different combinations of food and more details about using the plate method from the american diabetes association 's create your plate . your daily eating plan may also include small snacks between meals . portion sizes : you can use everyday objects or your hand to judge the size of a portion . for example , 1 serving of meat or poultry is the palm of your hand or a deck of cards , 1 3-ounce serving of fish is a checkbook , 1 serving of cheese is six dice , 1/2 cup of cooked rice or pasta is a rounded handful or a tennis ball , 1 serving of a pancake or waffle is a dvd , and 2 tablespoons of peanut butter is a ping-pong ball . carbohydrate counting : the plate method shows the amount of each food group you should eat . carbohydrate counting involves keeping track of the amount of carbohydrates you eat and drink each day . because carbohydrates turn into glucose in your body , they affect your blood glucose level more than other foods do . carb counting can help you manage your blood glucose level . if you take insulin , counting carbohydrates can help you know how much insulin to take . the right amount of carbohydrates varies by how you manage your diabetes , including how physically active you are and what medicines you take , if any . your health care team can help you create a personal eating plan based on carbohydrate counting . the amount of carbohydrates in foods is measured in grams . to count carbohydrate grams in what you eat , you 'll need to learn which foods have carbohydrates , read the nutrition facts food label , or learn to estimate the number of grams of carbohydrate in the foods you eat . add the grams of carbohydrate from each food you eat to get your total for each meal and for the day . most carbohydrates come from starches , fruits , milk , and sweets . try to limit carbohydrates with added sugars or those with refined grains , such as white bread and white rice . instead , eat carbohydrates from fruit , vegetables , whole grains , beans , and low-fat or nonfat milk . in addition to using the plate method and carb counting , you may want to visit a registered dietitian ( rd ) for medical nutrition therapy . choose healthy carbohydrates , such as fruit , vegetables , whole grains , beans , and low-fat milk , as part of your diabetes meal plan . what is medical nutrition therapy ? medical nutrition therapy is a service provided by an rd to create personal eating plans based on your needs and likes . for people with diabetes , medical nutrition therapy has been shown to improve diabetes management . medicare pays for medical nutrition therapy for people with diabetes . if you have insurance other than medicare , ask if it covers medical nutrition therapy for diabetes . will supplements and vitamins help my diabetes ? no clear proof exists that taking dietary supplements such as vitamins , minerals , herbs , or spices can help manage diabetes . you may need supplements if you can not get enough vitamins and minerals from foods . talk with your health care provider before you take any dietary supplement since some can cause side effects or affect how your medicines work . why should i be physically active if i have diabetes ? physical activity is an important part of managing your blood glucose level and staying healthy . being active has many health benefits . physical activity lowers blood glucose levels , lowers blood pressure , improves blood flow , burns extra calories so you can keep your weight down if needed , improves your mood , can prevent falls , and improves memory in older adults . it may help you sleep better . if you are overweight , combining physical activity with a reduced-calorie eating plan can lead to even more benefits . in the look ahead : action for health in diabetes study , overweight adults with type 2 diabetes who ate less and moved more had greater long-term health benefits compared to those who did n't make these changes . these benefits included improved cholesterol levels , less sleep apnea , and being able to move around more easily . even small amounts of physical activity can help . experts suggest that you aim for at least 30 minutes of moderate or vigorous physical activity 5 days of the week . moderate activity feels somewhat hard , and vigorous activity is intense and feels hard . if you want to lose weight or maintain weight loss , you may need to do 60 minutes or more of physical activity 5 days of the week . be patient . it may take a few weeks of physical activity before you see changes in your health . how can i be physically active safely if i have diabetes ? be sure to drink water before , during , and after exercise to stay well hydrated . the following are some other tips for safe physical activity when you have diabetes . plan ahead : talk with your health care team before you start a new physical activity routine , especially if you have other health problems . your health care team will tell you a target range for your blood glucose level and suggest how you can be active safely . your health care team also can help you decide the best time of day for you to do physical activity based on your daily schedule , meal plan , and diabetes medicines . if you take insulin , you need to balance the activity that you do with your insulin doses and meals so you do n't get low blood glucose . prevent low blood glucose : because physical activity lowers your blood glucose , you should protect yourself against low blood glucose levels , also called hypoglycemia . you are most likely to have hypoglycemia if you take insulin or certain other diabetes medicines , such as a sulfonylurea . hypoglycemia also can occur after a long intense workout or if you have skipped a meal before being active . hypoglycemia can happen during or up to 24 hours after physical activity . planning is key to preventing hypoglycemia . for instance , if you take insulin , your health care provider might suggest you take less insulin or eat a small snack with carbohydrates before , during , or after physical activity , especially intense activity . you may need to check your blood glucose level before , during , and right after you are physically active . stay safe when blood glucose is high : if you have type 1 diabetes , avoid vigorous physical activity when you have ketones in your blood or urine . ketones are chemicals your body might make when your blood glucose level is too high , a condition called hyperglycemia , and your insulin level is too low . if you are physically active when you have ketones in your blood or urine , your blood glucose level may go even higher . ask your health care team what level of ketones are dangerous for you and how to test for them . ketones are uncommon in people with type 2 diabetes . take care of your feet : people with diabetes may have problems with their feet because of poor blood flow and nerve damage that can result from high blood glucose levels . to help prevent foot problems , you should wear comfortable , supportive shoes and take care of your feet before , during , and after physical activity.what physical activities should i do if i have diabetes ? most kinds of physical activity can help you take care of your diabetes . certain activities may be unsafe for some people , such as those with low vision or nerve damage to their feet . ask your health care team what physical activities are safe for you . many people choose walking with friends or family members for their activity . doing different types of physical activity each week will give you the most health benefits . mixing it up also helps reduce boredom and lower your chance of getting hurt . try these options for physical activity : add extra activity to your daily routine : if you have been inactive or you are trying a new activity , start slowly , with 5 to 10 minutes a day . then add a little more time each week . increase daily activity by spending less time in front of a tv or other screen . try these simple ways to add physical activities in your life each day : walk around while you talk on the phone or during tv commercials . do chores , such as work in the garden , rake leaves , clean the house , or wash the car . park at the far end of the shopping center parking lot and walk to the store . take the stairs instead of the elevator . make your family outings active , such as a family bike ride or a walk in a park . if you are sitting for a long time , such as working at a desk or watching tv , do some light activity for 3 minutes or more every half hour . light activities include leg lifts or extensions , overhead arm stretches , desk chair swivels , torso twists , side lunges , walking in place . do aerobic exercise : aerobic exercise is activity that makes your heart beat faster and makes you breathe harder . you should aim for doing aerobic exercise for 30 minutes a day most days of the week . you do not have to do all the activity at one time . you can split up these minutes into a few times throughout the day . to get the most out of your activity , exercise at a moderate to vigorous level . try walking briskly or hiking , climbing stairs , swimming or a water-aerobics class , dancing , riding a bicycle or a stationary bicycle , taking an exercise class , playing basketball , tennis , or other sports . talk with your health care team about how to warm up and cool down before and after you exercise . do strength training to build muscle : strength training is a light or moderate physical activity that builds muscle and helps keep your bones healthy . strength training is important for both men and women . when you have more muscle and less body fat , you 'll burn more calories . burning more calories can help you lose and keep off extra weight . you can do strength training with hand weights , elastic bands , or weight machines . try to do strength training two to three times a week . start with a light weight . slowly increase the size of your weights as your muscles become stronger . do stretching exercises : stretching exercises are light or moderate physical activity . when you stretch , you increase your flexibility , lower your stress , and help prevent sore muscles . you can choose from many types of stretching exercises . yoga is a type of stretching that focuses on your breathing and helps you relax . even if you have problems moving or balancing , certain types of yoga can help . for instance , chair yoga has stretches you can do when sitting in a chair or holding onto a chair while standing . your health care team can suggest whether yoga is right for you . heart disease & stroke : diabetes can damage blood vessels and lead to heart disease and stroke . you can do a lot to prevent heart disease and stroke by managing your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels ; and by not smoking . low blood glucose ( hypoglycemia ) : hypoglycemia occurs when your blood glucose drops too low . certain diabetes medicines make low blood glucose more likely . you can prevent hypoglycemia by following your meal plan and balancing your physical activity , food , and medicines . testing your blood glucose regularly can also help prevent hypoglycemia . nerve damage ( diabetic neuropathy ) : diabetic neuropathy is nerve damage that can result from diabetes . different types of nerve damage affect different parts of your body . managing your diabetes can help prevent nerve damage that affects your feet and limbs , and organs such as your heart . foot problems : diabetes can cause nerve damage and poor blood flow , which can lead to serious foot problems . common foot problems , such as a callus , can lead to pain or an infection that makes it hard to walk . get a foot checkup at each visit with your health care team . kidney disease : diabetic kidney disease , also called diabetic nephropathy , is kidney disease caused by diabetes . you can help protect your kidneys by managing your diabetes and meeting your blood pressure goals . eye disease : diabetes can damage your eyes and lead to low vision and blindness . the best way to prevent eye disease is to manage your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol ; and to not smoke . also , have a dilated eye exam at least once a year . gum disease & other dental problems : diabetes can lead to problems in your mouth , such as infection , gum disease , or dry mouth . to help keep your mouth healthy , manage your blood glucose , brush your teeth twice a day , see your dentist at least once a year , and do n't smoke . sexual & urologic problems : having diabetes can increase your chance of having bladder problems and changes in sexual function . following your diabetes management plan is important to help prevent or delay sexual and urologic problems . cancer & diabetes : diabetes is linked to some types of cancer . many risk factors for cancer and for diabetes are the same . not smoking and getting recommended cancer screenings can help prevent cancer . dementia & diabetes : high blood glucose increases the chance of developing dementia . tell your doctor if you are forgetful because dementia can make it hard to manage your diabetes . depression & diabetes : depression is common among people with a chronic , or long-term , illness such as diabetes . depression can be treated so tell your doctor if you feel sad , hopeless , or anxious . sleep apnea & diabetes : people who have sleep apnea ( when you stop breathing for short periods during sleep ) are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . sleep apnea also can make diabetes worse . treatment for sleep apnea can help . type 1 diabetes . approximately 1.25 million american children and adults ( 0.4 % ) have type 1 diabetes . predominant onset is in childhood . 45 % of children present before 10 years of age . the body ’ s immune system attacks and destroys the beta cells in the pancreas that produce insulin . patients require lifelong insulin to stay alive . insulin : insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas which sits behind the stomach . insulin is released into the bloodstream where it travels throughout the body to help a sugar called glucose enter into cells to be used as energy . complications of diabetes : high glucose levels damage small and large blood vessels . diabetes is the leading cause of : adult blindness ; kidney failure ; non-traumatic amputations . diabetes increases the risk of heart attacks and strokes 2-4 fold . keeping blood glucose levels close to normal will largely prevent diabetes complications . type 1 diabetes management teach patients to give insulin to blood match the body ’ s needs . insulin injections . insulin pumps . fingerstick glucose measurements 4 or more times a day . adjust insulin dosage based on glucose level . what factors influence how well glucose levels are controlled ? correctly estimating the amount of carbohydrates in the meal . giving insulin 15-20 before meals is best . recent exercise decreases insulin requirements . physical and psychological stress , or inactivity increase insulin requirements . insulin absorption is affected by the dose , depth of injection , skin temperature , injection site , smoking , scar tissue . striving for near-normal glucose levels with insulin increases the risk of low blood glucose levels ( hypoglycemia ) . severe hypoglycemia : a very low glucose reaction that requires assistance from another person occurs in 25 % of intensively controlled patients yearly . symptoms may take hours to fully resolve may lead to seizures . estimated to be the cause of death in 4-6 % of type 1 diabetes patients . people living with type diabetes have to think about their diabetes all day to prevent long term complications and hypoglycemia . fingerstick glucose measurement . insulin injections . insulin pump therapy . what diabetes research provides ? hope . what patients with type diabetes want most ? cure . immunotherapy : prevent the onset or progression of auto-immune destruction of insulin-producing beta cells . block the destructive immune t cells . support regulatory cells which protect against autoimmunity . t effector and regulatory cell interactions determine appropriate immune response balance exists in normal immune response t effector cells kill viruses , bacteria and cancer cells regulatory cells regulate the immune response : balance exists in normal immune system . t effector cells kill viruses , bacteria , and cancer cells . regulatory cells regulate the immune response . misdirected e effector cells otchestrate cell destruction in autoimmune type 1 diabetes . normal proteins on the surface beta cells by a number of mechanisms . regulatory cell inhibition is ineffective . preventive treatments that target t effector cells or the destructive cytokines they release/ azathioprine , mycophenolate mofetil , cyclosporine , anti-cd3 antibodies , teplizumab , otelixizumab , rituximab , interleukin-1 antagonists . effective in mouse model of type 1 diabetes . commonly less effective in humans . at higher doses that lead to better protection . common effects : fever , headache , low blood pressure , rashes . acute mononucleosis-like syndrome . concern over the risk of long term immune suppression : infections ; cancer . preservation of regulatory cells in new-onset type 1 diabetes . regulatory cells . deficient in diabetic nod mice and humans with type 1 diabetes . we have confirmed that regulatory cells are destroyed by a fas-fasl interaction between cells . the normal way that immune cells are down-regulated after increasing in number to fight an infection . this is pathway is turned on to destroy regulatory cells in mice and humans that develop type 1 diabetes . blocking the fas-fasl pathway . through use of a fasl antibody protects regulatory cells from apoptosis ( death ) and prevents type 1 diabetes development in the nod mouse model . current and future studies . making humanized monoclonal fasl antibodies . identify and expand those with potent ability to block the activity of human fasl . plan to test their safety and immune effects in normal subjects . potential future use in type 1 diabetes prevention trials : as sole therapy ; in combination with lower doses of drugs targeted to t effector cells and destructive cytokines the management of type 2 diabetes is multi-faceted . following diagnosis , patients require education to self-manage their condition and make lifestyle changes . glycaemic targets need to be selected that are appropriate for the individual . management should be regularly reviewed with timely offers of treatment intensification , including initiation of insulin . however , good glycaemic control is only one factor that influences outcomes in people with type 2 diabetes . recent evidence has reiterated the benefits of managing cardiovascular risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes . key practice points : emphasize the importance of lifestyle change as the foundation of all treatments for type 2 diabetes and ensure all patients have access to self-management education . glycaemic targets should be negotiated individually with patients using shared-decision making . management of type 2 diabetes requires regular review and timely intensification of treatment , including insulin initiation if appropriate . isophane is the recommended first-line insulin ; initiation is managed in primary care . glycaemic control should always be managed in parallel with other cardiovascular risk factors . diabetes management essentials : the number of people in new zealand with diabetes is expected to double in the next 20 years , if current trends continue . it is estimated that there are now 242 , 000 people in new zealand with type 1 or type 2 diabetes , and a further 500 , 000 people with pre-diabetes ( hb a1c 41-49 mmol/mol ) . overall , 6 % of the adult population in new zealand has been diagnosed with diabetes including pacific peoples ( 9 % ) , mori ( 7 % ) , asian ( 6 % ) and people aged over 65 years ( > 10 % ) .2 there are also a substantial number of undiagnosed people in new zealand with type 2 diabetes . a sample of over 4700 people found higher rates of undiagnosed diabetes in pacific peoples ( 6.4 % ) , compared with mori ( 2.2 % ) and new zealand european and others ( 1.5 % ) . a focus on mori and pacific peoples : mori and pacific peoples with diabetes are likely to benefit from more intensive management as they often have poor glycaemic control and may develop cardiovascular disease and renal damage more rapidly than new zealand europeans.a review of almost 30 , 000 patients attending annual diabetes checks in new zealand found the average hb a1c was 68.6 mmol/ mol for pacific patients , 64.9 mmol/mol for mori patients and 54.9 mmol/mol for new zealand european patients . information and statistics on diabetes care for individual dhbs is available from the health quality and safety commissions atlas of healthcare variation . management always begins with lifestyle : a healthy lifestyle is the foundation of treatment for all people with type 2 diabetes . weight reduction is effective for reducing blood pressure and improving lipid profile . patients can be encouraged to reduce their intake of saturated fat and trans fats and increase dietary fibre , e.g . whole grains . a reduced portion size at meals may be appropriate for some people . if agreed lifestyle goals are not achieved discussions should be initiated to help overcome barriers to change , regardless of diabetes duration or type of medicine being taken . if a patient has successfully made lifestyle changes but their glycaemic control is inadequate , the possibility of more intensive lifestyle changes may be discussed . patient education is part of diabetes management : often people who have lived with diabetes for many years have a poor understanding of their condition . despite type 2 diabetes being a progressive disease , some people may believe it will eventually “ go away ” . if a patient is able to achieve ongoing glycaemic control below the diagnostic threshold for diabetes they are considered to be in remission , rather than cured . diabetes remission can be achieved with very low-calorie diets diabetes remission is defined as glycaemic control below the diagnostic threshold for type 2 diabetes without the need for pharmacological or ongoing surgical treatment , e.g . repeated replacements of gastrointestinal devices . the term remission acknowledges that people diagnosed with type 2 diabetes who have exceptional glycaemic control remain at risk of relapse due to aberrant physiology and/or genetic predisposition . diabetes remission can be achieved following bariatric surgery or significant weight loss . emerging data shows that people with diabetes who consume very low-calorie diets are able to achieve large reductions in hba1c , body weight and cardiovascular risk , at least in the short term . these diets involve severe calorie restriction , e.g . eating less than 3350 kj ( 800 calories ) per day ; this is difficult to achieve and sustain , and studies have reported drop-out rates as high as one-third . severe restrictions on calorie intake are only appropriate for highly motivated patients who are overweight . it is recommended that input from a dietitian and medical supervision be arranged before patients are initiated on very low calorie diets . to date , studies investigating very low calorie diets have involved relatively small sample sizes and follow-up has been limited , therefore the long-term effectiveness of these diets is unknown . patients who consume very low calorie diets require ongoing maintenance strategies to manage their weight . a systematic review of 17 studies found an average reduction in hba1c of approximately 15 mmol/mol , although variability between studies was high . patients lost an average of 13.2 kg and all studies reported significant reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure and total cholesterol . structured diabetes education is recognised in new zealand as a critical aspect of treatment . the goal is to enable the patient to take an active role in their own care . the cultural needs of the patient and their family/whnau are important when considering education programmes . programmes that deliver education in face-to-face sessions are more likely to be effective , and those that offer 11 hours of contact have been shown to improve glycaemic control . diabetes new zealand has local branches throughout the country that provide a variety of services . glycaemic targets need to be individualized : reducing hyperglycaemia decreases the onset and progression of microvascular complications such as retinopathy , nephropathy and neuropathy.12 an hb a1c target of 50-55 mmol/mol can be explained as the speed-limit for patients , i.e . measurements above this level are increasingly unsafe . however , glycaemic targets need to take into account diabetes duration , the presence of co-morbidities , life expectancy , social circumstances and the personal beliefs and priorities of the patient . this flexible approach acknowledges the importance of quality of life and maintenance of function , rather than focusing purely on glycaemic control . in older people or those living alone , a less intensive target may be appropriate if there is a high risk of hypoglycaemia . intensive blood glucose control can be harmful to older people with co-morbidities . for example , in people with diabetes and an average age over 60 years and concurrent cardiovascular disease or elevated cardiovascular risk , a glycaemic target of < 42 mmol/mol for more than three years was found to increase mortality . conversely , the longer life expectancy of a younger person means a more stringent target may be appropriate due to the increased duration of exposure to hyperglycaemia . glycaemic targets should be periodically reviewed and may need to be adjusted in response to changes in circumstance such as planning a pregnancy or becoming pregnant , a new medical condition or a change in social situation , e.g . living alone . intensifying diabetes treatment with oral medicines : despite receiving treatment , many people with type 2 diabetes spend long periods with poorly controlled blood glucose . regular review is therefore essential for improving glycaemic control in all patients with diabetes . treatment adherence should be assessed in patients who are unable to meet glycaemic targets . treatment intensification is encouraged in patients who are adherent with their medicines , but unable to meet targets . in general , intensification is appropriate if the patients hb a1c levels do not meet , or closely approach , an agreed target within three months . metformin remains the first-line medicine : metformin remains the first-line pharmacological treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes because it is safe , effective , does not cause weight gain and provides patients with additional cardiovascular benefits . there is a low threshold for initiation and metformin should be added at , or soon after , diagnosis for all patients with type 2 diabetes , unless there are . new zealand guidelines recommend trialling lifestyle modification for three months in asymptomatic patients before beginning treatment with metformin . in practice , however , metformin may often be initiated at diagnosis . international guidance increasingly suggests that patients with markedly elevated hb a1c levels at diagnosis , e.g . 75 mmol/mol , should be initiated on multiple anti-diabetic medicines . this approach to treatment may become more common in the future . metformin decreases glucose production by the liver and increases peripheral utilization of glucose . lactic acidosis can be expected to occur in one in every 10 , 000 patients taking metformin ; a similar risk to other oral anti-diabetic medicines . metformin is contraindicated in patients with significant renal impairment . the dose should be reviewed in patients with an e gfr < 45 m l/min/1.73m2 and metformin is generally avoided in patients with an e gfr < 30 m l/min/1.73m2 . patients taking metformin may experience gastrointestinal adverse effects which can be minimised with a low initial dose and slow titration , often to 1.5 2 g daily , in divided doses ; the maximum daily dose is 3 g , in divided doses . in patients with gastrointestinal adverse effects , a low dose of metformin is preferable to withdrawing treatment completely . treatment should be temporarily withdrawn if the patient becomes dehydrated , acutely unwell or displays signs of ketoacidosis . adding a sulfonylurea : a sulfonylurea can be added to metformin for patients who have not reached an agreed hb a1c target with metformin alone . this class of medicine is most effective in people who have had type 2 diabetes for less than five years ; a lack of response may indicate a loss of functional pancreatic beta-cells . sulfonylureas are contraindicated in patients with ketoacidosis or acute porphyria . caution is required if a sulfonylurea is prescribed to an older patient or a patient with reduced renal function , due to the risk of hypoglycaemia . weight-gain is a common adverse effect of treatment with sulfonylureas . there are three sulfonylureas available in new zealand : glipizide , gliclazide and glibenclamide . glipizide and gliclazide are shorter-acting and are the preferred medicines . acarbose is an alternative first-line treatment : acarbose can be used as a first-line treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes where metformin or a sulfonylurea are contraindicated or not tolerated , or as an adjunctive treatment for patients taking metformin , a sulfonylurea or insulin . however , despite being safe , acarbose is not widely used as it is only mildly effective and is associated with significant gastrointestinal adverse effects . acarbose reduces the amount of glucose absorbed in the small intestine by blocking the -glucosidase enzyme , which breaks down complex carbohydrates into glucose . acarbose is contraindicated in patients with inflammatory bowel disease , colonic ulceration , predisposition to , or history of , intestinal obstruction , large hernias or gastrointestinal disorders with malabsorption . it should be avoided in patients with an e gfr < 25 m l/min/1.73m2 or severe hepatic impairment . acarbose tablets should be chewed with the first mouthful of food or swallowed whole with a drink immediately before eating . gastrointestinal adverse effects , e.g . flatulence and diarrhea , are common , especially when sucrose or sucrose- containing foods are consumed . pioglitazone is an alternative to standard treatments : pioglitazone may be appropriate when treatment with metformin and a sulfonylurea is not tolerated or contraindicated , or if an alternative to insulin is required , e.g . the patient would prefer trialling another oral medicine before initiating insulin . pioglitazone may also be used in combination with metformin and a sulfonylurea , or as an adjunctive treatment with metformin in patients who require escalating doses of insulin . pioglitazone , and other thiazolidinediones , bind to nuclear receptors in insulin sensitive tissues leading to a reduction in insulin resistance and improvements in glucose and lipid metabolism . medicines in this class are considered to be insulin sensitizers , like metformin , and do not cause hypoglycaemia . the use of a thiazolidinedione can cause significant weight gain , peripheral oedema and the risk of heart failure is increased . there is also an increased risk of bone fracture , particularly in post-menopausal females taking pioglitazone . despite the adverse effects , pioglitazone may be beneficial in patients for whom there is a limited number of treatment options . if pioglitazone is prescribed in combination with insulin low doses are recommended , with close monitoring for adverse effects . pioglitazone is contraindicated in patients with a history of heart failure , non-investigated macroscopic haematuria or bladder cancer . patients taking a sulfonylurea or insulin may need dose adjustments after beginning treatment with pioglitazone due to an increased risk of hypoglycaemia associated with combination treatment . liver function testing is recommended before beginning treatment and periodically thereafter . advise patients to contact a health professional immediately if they develop symptoms suggestive of liver toxicity , i.e . nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain , fatigue , dark urine or jaundice . pioglitazone and bladder cancer : the controversy and the risk : concerns that pioglitazone use is associated with an increased incidence of bladder cancer were first raised during preclinical trials in the 1990s . a meta-analysis including five randomized controlled trials and observational studies found a modest , but clinically significant , increase in the risk of bladder cancer ; the larger the cumulative dose and the longer the duration of treatment , the greater the risk . in 2011 , the united states food and drug administration ( fda ) announced that labels for pioglitazone-containing medicines must include a warning that use for more than one year may be associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer . in contrast , a more recent study not included in the previous meta-analysis , with at least ten years follow-up , found that in more than 34 , 000 patients , treatment with pioglitazone was not associated with an increased risk of bladder , lung , endometrium , colon , rectum or kidney cancer , non-hodgkins lymphoma or melanoma . the authors did note a 41 % increased risk of pancreatic cancer and a 13 % increased risk of prostate cancer associated with pioglitazone use . however , other anti-diabetic medicines were also associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer suggesting reverse causality , i.e . that diabetes may increase the risk of pancreatic cancer . due to the uncertainty surrounding pioglitazone and cancer risk it is helpful to take a pragmatic view . bladder cancer is relatively uncommon and the absolute risk to patients due to pioglitazone exposure is likely to be small . the study that did find an association between pioglitazone treatment and bladder cancer calculated the number needed to harm ( nnh ) for one additional person to develop bladder cancer after more than two years cumulative treatment to be more than 1400. the contraindication of previous or active bladder cancer means that patients at the highest risk will not be exposed to treatment with pioglitazone . newer anti-diabetic medicines that are approved but not subsidized : incretin-modulating medicines act on incretins , which are intestinal hormones that control the post-prandial production of insulin and glucagon . there are three incretin-modulating medicines approved for use , but not subsidized , in new zealand : exenatide is a glp-1 agonist which increases postprandial insulin release and decreases glucagon secretion ; given subcutaneously sitagliptin and saxagliptin are oral dpp-iv inhibitors which block the enzyme which degrades incretins , thereby increasing the levels of endogenous hormones both dpp-iv inhibitors and glp-1 agonists have a marked glucose-lowering effect that reduces post-prandial hyperglycaemia with no additional risk of hypoglycaemia . unlike sulfonylureas and thiazolidinediones , dpp-iv inhibitors do not cause weight gain and patients taking glp-1 agonists can be expected to lose weight . dpp-iv inhibitors and glp-1 agonists are generally well tolerated and have relatively few adverse effects . due to concerns about pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer , the fda and the european medicines agency conducted extensive independent reviews on the safety of medicines which interact with incretins . it was concluded that there was “ no compelling evidence ” of an increased risk of pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer in patients taking incretin-based medicines . however , pancreatitis is still considered to be a risk associated with the use of these medicines until proven otherwise . a recent review of three trials involving dpp-iv inhibitors in treating people with type 2 diabetes concluded that they lowered hba1c by 3.3-8.8 mmol/mol , but did not modify cardiovascular disease or mortality . however , the follow-up periods in these studies ranged from 1.5-3 years which may not have been long enough to detect changes in cardiovascular outcomes . the sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 ( sglt2 ) inhibitors are a new class of glucose lowering medicine . in new zealand , dapagliflozin and canagliflozin are approved for use , but not subsidized . they are indicated as a first-line treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes who can not tolerate metformin , or as an adjunctive treatment with metformin , sulfonylurea and/or insulin . the sglt2 inhibitors have an hba1c lowering effect similar to other oral diabetes medicines . these medicines are generally well tolerated and improve glycaemic control by reducing glucose absorption and increasing urinary glucose excretion by up to 80 g per day . due to their novel mechanism of action , sglt2 inhibitors do not increase the risk of hypoglycaemia and they are effective in people with reduced pancreatic beta-cell function ; although there is an increase in the risk of genital yeast infections , as well as urinary tract infections . clinical trials have found that treatment with sglt2 inhibitors is associated with reductions in hba1c of 5.5-11 mmol/mol , compared with placebo . patients can expect to lose 2 kg over six to 12 months of treatment and reduce systolic blood pressure by 2-4 mmhg and diastolic blood pressure by 1-2 mmhg . a recent study of over 7000 patients found that the addition of a sglt2 inhibitor ( empagliflozin ) to standard care for a median of 2.6 years resulted in significantly lower rates of death from cardiovascular causes , hospitalization due to heart failure and all-cause mortality , compared with the addition of a placebo . this study was discontinued early due to the cardiovascular benefits of treatment with empagliflozin . similar cardiovascular outcomes studies are yet to report their findings , but it appears sglt2 inhibitors will have an increasing role in the treatment of type 2 diabetes in the future . initiating insulin treatment : insulin has a greater blood glucose lowering ability than any other hypoglycaemic medicine and it is eventually required by many people with type 2 diabetes . however , a reluctance to initiate , by both patients and clinicians , often delays treatment . initiation of insulin in primary care should be considered for any patients with hba1c persistently greater than their individualized target ( especially hba1c > 65 mmol/ mol ) , despite optimal oral treatment , particularly if they have signs such as ketonuria and weight loss . following initiation , doses need to be titrated to optimise treatment . selecting an insulin regimen the patient ’ s blood glucose pattern , as determined by self-monitoring , is used to select an insulin treatment regimen . isophane , once daily , at night : this regimen is appropriate for patients with high fasting blood glucose levels in the morning that either decrease or stay constant as the day progresses . a recommended starting dose is 10 units of isophane , before bed . isophane , once daily , before breakfast : this regimen is appropriate for patients with acceptable fasting blood glucose levels in the morning that rise throughout the day . a recommended starting dose is 10 units of isophane , each morning . isophane , twice daily : this regimen may be considered if the patient has high blood glucose levels during the day and at night , or if they are markedly hyperglycaemic . a recommended starting dose is 6-10 units of isophane , morning and night . new zealand guidelines recommend that treatment with a sulfonylurea be withdrawn in patients taking twice daily isophane . however , in practice metformin and sulfonylureas are generally continued throughout treatment with basal insulin , such as isophane . when insulin therapy is intensified to include a short-acting insulin ( e.g . with meals ) sulfonylureas are withdrawn . some international guidance recommends that insulin treatment begin with a long-acting form . in reality there is little difference in efficacy between long and intermediate acting forms of insulin . long-acting forms of insulin , e.g . glargine , may be appropriate if hypoglycaemia is a concern . pre-mixed insulins may be considered for patients who are unable to meet hba1c targets with isophane and have elevated post-prandial blood glucose levels . biphasic insulin lispro and insulin as part pre-mixes are preferred by some clinicians to biphasic isophane pre-mixes due to a reduced risk of hypoglycaemia . the transition from basal insulin to pre-mixed insulin can be managed in primary care , although discussion with a diabetologist or diabetes nurse is recommended for practitioners who are not experienced with the process . managing hypoglycaemia : before insulin is initiated , ensure that patients know the symptoms of hypoglycaemia , e.g . shaking , sweating , blurred vision , light-headedness , loss of concentration . hypoglycaemia usually begins when blood glucose is < 4 mmol/l.26 if symptoms occur , advise the patient to check their blood glucose level ( if possible ) to confirm that this is the cause of their symptoms . patients with hypoglycaemia can be advised to : eat one serving of a quick-acting carbohydrate , e.g . seven to eight jellybeans or three teaspoons of glucose powder dissolved in water check blood glucose level after ten minutes – if it is still < 4 mmol/l , eat another serving of quick-acting carbohydrate . once blood glucose level is > 4 mmol/l , eat a snack such as three or four crackers , or a small tub of low-fat yoghurt , or a meal if it is the appropriate time of day if a patient has recurrent episodes of hypoglycaemia , despite lowering the dose , consider contacting a diabetologist or a diabetes nurse for further management advice . titrating insulin dosing : the initial insulin dose is a starting point . the dose should be titrated until the agreed glycaemic level is reached or hypoglycaemia limits further increases . advise patients to maintain a regular intake of food during this process . three consecutive blood glucose measurements are used to titrate insulin dosing , the timing of which depends on the regimen : once daily , at night – measure blood glucose pre-breakfast ( fasting ) ; once daily , before breakfast – measure blood glucose pre-evening meal ; twice daily – measure blood glucose either pre-breakfast or pre-evening meal . generally the patient ’ s blood glucose levels are reviewed every two to four days , depending on their response . ideally , patients will be able to self-adjust insulin doses and follow-up should be arranged to ensure that this is occurring . contact with the patient in the days immediately following insulin initiation is important to support treatment and improve outcomes . the frequency of self-monitoring of blood glucose can be reduced once the insulin regimen is established . managing risk factors with regular follow-up : people with type 2 diabetes are three times more likely to die of a cardiovascular event compared with the general population . while good glycaemic control improves microvascular outcomes , it does not appear to improve cardiovascular outcomes to the same extent . therefore glycaemic control is part of a wider suite of interventions for patients with type 2 diabetes , including smoking cessation , blood pressure control , lipid management and , if appropriate , antiplatelet treatment . a study found that in patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria the risk of cardiovascular and microvascular events was reduced by approximately one-half with an intensive management strategy focusing on multiple risk factors , compared to conventional care . the importance of treating hypertension : between 70 % and 80 % of people with type 2 diabetes have hypertension . people with diabetes are particularly susceptible to blood pressure-related complications ; a systolic blood pressure > 120 mmhg in combination with diabetes predicts long-term end-stage kidney disease . controlling blood pressure in patients with diabetes decreases the risk of myocardial infarction , heart failure , stroke and all-cause-mortality , nephropathy and other microvascular complications . recently the benefits of blood pressure control in patients with type 2 diabetes have been quantified . a meta-analysis including more than 100 , 000 people with type 2 diabetes and hypertension , found that each 10 mmhg drop in systolic blood pressure was associated with a significantly lower risk of mortality , cardiovascular events , coronary heart disease and stroke . however , the optimal range when managing blood pressure in people with type 2 diabetes is narrow ; systolic blood pressure < 120 mmhg is associated with an increased risk of hypotension , falls and cardiac dysrhythmias . treating hypertension improves microvascular outcomes : controlling hypertension in people with type 2 diabetes is associated with reduced diabetic retinopathy and albuminuria . a cochrane review found that reducing blood pressure had a protective effect against diabetic retinopathy that lasted for four to five years . however , there was less evidence supporting the use of antihypertensives as a treatment for existing retinopathy . angiotensin converting enzyme ( ace ) inhibitors are firstline : pharmacological treatment is recommended for all patients with type 2 diabetes with a blood pressure consistently > 130/80 mmhg for three months , despite changes in lifestyle . an ace inhibitor is the preferred antihypertensive for patients with type 2 diabetes ; an angiotensin ii receptor blocker ( arb ) is recommended if an ace inhibitor is not tolerated . annual reviews of kidney function : the albumin : creatinine ratio ( acr ) of patients with type 2 diabetes should be measured at least annually and more frequently for māori , pacific and south asian peoples . microalbuminuria is the earliest sign of chronic kidney disease ( ckd ) in people with diabetes and requires prompt treatment . treat albuminuria to reduce cardiovascular risk . preserving renal function is a crucial part of diabetes care . blood living well with diabetes : a strategic plan from the ministry of health : in october , 2015 , the ministry of health released its “ living well with diabetes ” vision . the objective is to ensure that people with diabetes , or at risk of developing type 2 diabetes , are living well and have access to high-quality patient-centred heath services . the plan identifies six priority areas : to ensure health services are based on evidence and to test and evaluate interventions to find out what works best in new zealand . prevention and early intervention , including mental health needs , to reduce the burden of diabetes . reducing disparities in health outcomes due to diabetes . providing patient-centred health services . providing sustainable and consistent health services across new zealand . achieving effective self-management of diabetes , including the provision of technology-enabled tools . within the plan are measures created to track progress in improving health outcomes for people with diabetes against a two-year baseline from 2013 – 2014. pressure control is the cornerstone of treatment for people with reduced renal function . management of cardiovascular risk factors needs to be intensive in patients with type 2mdiabetes and microalbuminuria . the five-year cardiovascular risk of a patient with diabetes and an acr ≥ 30 mg/mmol is assumed to be > 20 % . managing cholesterol in patients with type 2 diabetes : people with type 2 diabetes often have elevated serum triglycerides , decreased hdl cholesterol levels and ldl cholesterol levels that vary from elevated to normal . in patients with type 2 diabetes ldl particles may be more prone to plaque formation . consider initiating a statin for patients with a five-year cardiovascular risk of > 10 % ; the benefits of statin treatment increase as the patient ’ s cardiovascular risk increase . making foot checks a habit : encourage patients with type 2 diabetes to inspect their feet regularly or ask a family member to do so . the patient ’ s feet should be assessed at least once a year , or every three months if they are at high risk of foot complications . risk factors for foot disease in people with diabetes include : presence of callus ; peripheral vascular disease ; peripheral neuropathy ; previous amputation ; previous ulceration ; joint deformity ; visual/mobility problems . retinopathy testing at least every two years : patients with type 2 diabetes require retinal testing at least every two years . testing is performed more frequently if the patient has been diagnosed with retinopathy , depending on the severity . assess mental health and wellbeing : health professionals should be vigilant for mental health problems in patients with type 2 diabetes . depression is reportedly twice as common , compared with people in the between the conditions , i.e . type 2 diabetes increases the risk of depression and depression increases the risk of type 2 diabetes . patients may experience anxiety when they are diagnosed with diabetes or when complications occur . only one-third of patients with type 2 diabetes and a co-existing mental health disorder are reported to receive treatment for this . poor mental health makes it more likely that patients will not adhere to treatment or attend consultations , increasing their risk of diabetes-related complications and reducing quality of life . consider using a depression screening tool such as the patient health questionnaire ( phq ) . over the last two weeks , how often have you been bothered by either of the following problems ? ” : little interest or pleasure in doing things feeling down , depressed , or hopeless not at all = 0 points , several days = 1 point , more than half the days = 2 points , nearly every day = 3 points . a combined score ≥3 across the two questions indicates depression.35 the importance of assessing mental health and wellbeing is highlighted in the recent living well with diabetes strategic plan from the ministry of health . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a condition that causes blood sugar ( blood glucose ) levels to rise higher than normal . hyperglycemia is the term doctors use to describe high blood sugar . when you eat , your body breaks food down into glucose and sends it into the blood . Insulin , a hormone made in your pancreas , helps move the glucose from your blood into your blood cells as fuel for energy . your pancreas is an organ in your abdomen ( stomach ) . there are three types of diabetes : type , type 2 , and gestational diabetes ( diabetes you have when you ’ re pregnant ) . what is type 2 diabetes ? in type 2 diabetes , your body has trouble using the insulin its making . this is called insulin resistance , and it causes your blood sugar to rise higher than normal . first , your pancreas makes more insulin to make up for this . but over time , it isn ’ t able to keep your blood sugar levels in a normal range . when blood sugar levels stay high for extended periods of time , it increases your risk of other medical problems like heart attacks , kidney disease , blindness , and nerve pain . what treatments are used for type 2 diabetes ? the goal of treatment is to help you feel good and prevent long term problems caused by diabetes . to meet these goals , your health care team will collaborate with you to create a care plan that includes lifestyle changes and medications . your care plan will help you reach your treatment goals . the best way to reach these goals is to : have an eating plan that meets your needs and helps you reach your goals . What you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat are all important . stay physically active and get regular exercise . take your medications ( both pills and injected medications ) as prescribed by your doctor . understanding type 2 diabetes needing to take medication , including insulin , to manage your type 2 diabetes does not mean you failed . taking medication is simply part of good diabetes management . The most important thing you can do to stay healthy with diabetes is manage your blood sugar well and that means taking medication on schedule and making healthy lifestyle choices . type 2 diabetes changes over time . first , healthy eating and physical activity may be enough to reach your targets . but most people end up needing medications , including insulin , at some point to manage their blood sugar , no matter how hard they work to reach their targets . what causes type 2 diabetes ? scientists do not know the exact cause of type 2 diabetes . however , developing type 2 diabetes has been linked with several risk factors . these include : how will I know if my diabetes treatment is working ? get an a1c blood test at least two times a year . this helps you and your health care team know how well you are managing your blood sugar levels . The a1c test is part of your abcs of diabetes an easy way to check how well your diabetes treatment is working . the ABCs of diabetes are : ais for a1c or estimated average glucose ( eag ) your a1c test tells you your average blood sugar for the past two to three months . your health care provider may call this your estimated average glucose , also called your eag . the eag shows your a1c results in the same units ( mg/dl ) as the glucose meter you use at home . b Is for blood pressure your blood pressure numbers tell you the force of blood inside your blood vessels . when your blood pressure is high , your heart must work harder . c is for cholesterol . your cholesterol numbers tell you about the amount of fats in your blood . some kinds of cholesterol can raise your risk for heart attack and stroke . a history of hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) , such as prediabetes and/or gestational diabetes are 45 or older are black , hispanic/latino , american indian , asian american , or pacific islander have a parent , brother , or sister with diabetes are overweight are physically inactive have high blood pressure or take medicine for high blood pressure have low hdl cholesterol and/or high triglycerides have been diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome . diabetes mellitus is characterized by abnormally high levels of sugar ( glucose ) in the blood . when the amount of glucose in the blood increases , e.g . , after a meal , it triggers the release of the hormone insulin from the pancreas . insulin stimulates muscle and fat cells to remove glucose from the blood and stimulates the liver to metabolize glucose , causing the blood sugar level to decrease to normal levels . in people with diabetes , blood sugar levels remain high . this may be because insulin is not being produced at all , is not made at sufficient levels , or is not as effective as it should be . the most common forms of diabetes are type 1 diabetes ( 5 % ) , which is an autoimmune disorder , and type 2 diabetes ( 95 % ) , which is associated with obesity . gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that occurs in pregnancy , and other forms of diabetes are very rare and are caused by a single gene mutation . for many years , scientists have been searching for clues in our genetic makeup that may explain why some people are more likely to get diabetes than others are . classification diabetes is classified by underlying cause . the categories are : type 1 diabetes an autoimmune disease in which the body 's own immune system attacks the pancreas , rendering it unable to produce insulin ; type 2 diabetes in which a resistance to the effects of insulin or a defect in insulin secretion may be seen ; gestational diabetes ; and other types . type 2 diabetes commonly occurs in adults who are obese . there are many underlying factors that contribute to the high blood glucose levels in these individuals . an important factor is the body 's resistance to insulin in the body , essentially ignoring its insulin secretions . a second factor is the falling production of insulin by the beta cells of the pancreas . therefore , an individual with type 2 diabetes may have a combination of deficient secretion and deficient action of insulin . in contrast to type 2 , type 1 diabetes most commonly occurs in children and is a result of the body 's immune system attacking and destroying the beta cells . the trigger for this autoimmune attack is not clear , but the result is the end of insulin production . comparison of type 1 and type 2 diabetes . type 1 diabetes type 2 diabetes phenotype onset primarily in childhood and adolescence onset predominantly after 40 years of age thin or normal weight often obese prone to ketoacidosis no ketoacidosis insulin administration required for survival insulin administration not required for survival pancreas is damaged by an autoimmune attack pancreas is not damaged by an autoimmune attack absolute insulin deficiency relative insulin deficiency and/or insulin resistance treatment : insulin injections treatment : ( 1 ) healthy diet and increased exercise ; ( 2 ) hypoglycemic tablets ; ( 3 ) insulin injections genotype increased prevalence in relatives increased prevalence in relatives type 2 diabetes is increasingly diagnosed in younger patients . history of diabetes physicians have observed the effects of diabetes for thousands of years . for much of this time , little was known about this fatal disease that caused wasting away of the body , extreme thirst , and frequent urination . it was n't until 1922 that the first patient was successfully treated with insulin . one of the effects of diabetes is the presence of glucose in the urine ( glucosuria ) . ancient hindu writings , many thousands of years old , document how black ants and flies were attracted to the urine of diabetics . the indian physician sushruta in 400 b.c . described the sweet taste of urine from affected individuals , and for many centuries to come , the sweet taste of urine was key to diagnosis . around 250 b.c . , the name diabetes was first used . it is a greek word that means to syphon , reflecting how diabetes seemed to rapidly drain fluid from the affected individual . the greek physician aretaeus noted that as affected individuals wasted away , they passed increasing amounts of urine as if there was liquefaction of flesh and bones into urine . the complete term diabetes mellitus was coined in 1674 by thomas willis , personal physician to king charles ii . mellitus is latin for honey , which is how willis described the urine of diabetics ( as if imbued with honey and sugar ) . up until the mid-1800s , the treatments offered for diabetes varied tremendously . various fad diets were prescribed , and the use of opium was suggested , as were bleeding and other therapies . the most successful treatments were starvation diets in which calorie intake was severely restricted . naturally , this was intolerable for the patient and at best extended life expectancy for a few years . a breakthrough in the puzzle of diabetes came in 1889. german physicians joseph von mering and oskar minkowski surgically removed the pancreas from dogs . the dogs immediately developed diabetes . now that a link was established between the pancreas gland and diabetes , research focused on isolating the pancreatic extract that could treat diabetes . when dr. frederick banting took up the challenge of isolating a pancreatic extract , he was met with much skepticism . many great physiologists had tried and failed to isolate an internal secretion from the pancreas . but banting , a surgeon , persisted and in may 1921 , he began work in the laboratory of professor john macloed in toronto , canada . charles best , a medical student at the time , worked as his assistant . to concentrate what we now know as insulin , banting tied the pancreatic ducts of dogs . the pancreatic cells that released digestive enzymes ( and could also destroy insulin ) degenerated , but the cells that secreted insulin were spared . over several weeks the pancreas degenerated into a residue from which insulin could be extracted . in july 1921 , a dog that had had its pancreas surgically removed was injected with an extract collected from a duct- tied dog . in the two hours that followed the injection , the blood sugar level of the dog fell , and its condition improved . another de-pancreatized ( diabetic-like ) dog was kept alive for eight days by regular injections until supplies of the extract , at that time called `` isletin `` , were exhausted.2 genetic landscape of diabetes further experiments on dogs showed that extracts from the pancreas caused a drop in blood sugar , caused glucose in the urine to disappear , and produced a marked improvement in clinical condition . so long as the extract was being given , the dogs were kept alive . the supply of the extract was improved : the pancreas of different animals were used until that of the cow was settled upon . this extract kept a de-pancreatized dog alive for days . dr. j. collip , a biochemist , was drafted to continue improving the purity of the pancreas extract , and later , best carried on this work . a young boy , leonard thompson , was the first patient to receive insulin treatment . on january 11 , 1922 , aged 14 and weighing only 64 pounds , he was extremely ill. the first injections of insulin only produced a slight lowering of blood sugar level . the extract still was not pure enough , and abscesses developed at the injection site . collip continued to refine the extract . several weeks later , leonard was treated again and showed a remarkable recovery . his blood sugar levels fell , he gained weight and lived for another 13 years . he died from pneumonia at the age of 27. during the spring of 1922 , best increased the production of insulin to enable the treatment of diabetic patients coming to the toronto clinic . over the next 60 years , insulin was further refined and purified , and long-acting and intermediate types were developed to provide more flexibility . a revolution came with the production of recombinant human dna insulin in 1978. instead of collecting insulin from animals , new human insulin could be synthesized . in 1923 , banting and macloed were awarded the nobel prize for the discovery of insulin . banting split his prize with best , and macloed split his prize with collip . in his nobel lecture , banting concluded the following about their discovery : insulin is not a cure for diabetes ; it is a treatment . it enables the diabetic to burn sufficient carbohydrates , so that proteins and fats may be added to the diet in sufficient quantities to provide energy for the economic burdens of life . epidemiology box 1. increase of diabetes in adults in the united states . about 5 million do not know they have the disease ( 1 ) . type 1 diabetes accounts for 5-10 % of cases , affecting 1 of 400 children and adolescents . type 2 diabetes is extremely common , accounting for 90-95 % of all cases of diabetes . this form of diabetes can go undiagnosed for many years , but the number of cases that are being diagnosed is rising rapidly , leading to reports of a diabetes epidemic . the type 2 diabetes epidemic when people think of epidemics , they often think of infectious diseases such as sars , hiv , or the flu . however , the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is now at epidemic proportions . in the united states , diabetes accounts for over 130 billion dollars of health care costs and is the fifth leading cause of death ( 2 ) . the number of new cases being diagnosed continues to rise . it has been estimated that of the children born in the year 2000 , 1 of 3 will suffer from diabetes at some point in their lifetime ( 3 ) . diabetes is predicted to become one of the most common diseases in the world within a couple of decades , affecting at least half a billion people ( 4 ) . estimate your risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the past , type 2 was rarely seen in the young , hence its original name of adult-onset diabetes . but now type 2 diabetes is increasingly being diagnosed in young adults and even in children . in japan , more children suffer from type 2 than type 1 ( juvenile onset ) diabetes . this young generation of diabetics will have many decades in which to develop the complications of diabetes . in 1990 , 4.9 % of the american population were diagnosed with diabetes . this increased to 7.9 % by the year 2001 ( 5 ) . obesity the driving force behind the high prevalence of diabetes is the rise of obesity in the population . in today 's society , it can be difficult to maintain a healthy weight . we have the combination of ample food and a sedentary lifestyle . this is in stark contrast to only a couple of hundred years ago , when people were more active and food supplies were not as abundant . as a result , many of us are heavier than we should be . calculate your ideal weight4 genetic landscape of diabetes being overweight or obese is defined by a calculation called the body mass index ( bmi ) . it is a calculation that takes your height and weight into consideration and gives you a score . a score of .9 is a healthy weight . if you are overweight , your score lies within the range to 2529.9 ; a score of 30 and above indicates obesity . calculate your bmi in 1991 , it was estimated that 12 % of the population were obese ( 5 ) . by the year 2001 , this had increased to an estimated 20.9 % of the population ; this represents over 44 million obese adult americans . amore recent study estimated that a record 30 % of the american population are now obese ( 6 ) obesity is a major problem for the united states . every year , an estimated 300,000 us adults die of causes related to obesity ( 7 ) . obesity is also a huge economic burden , accounting for up to 4 % of healthcare costs in the united states ( 8 ) . thrifty genes epidemics of infectious diseases increase when there is increased spread of the infectious agent and decrease when the number of victims who are susceptible falls ( they either become immune or they die ) . an epidemic of a genetic disease such as type 2 diabetes is similar . the number of cases rises when there is a rise in environmental risk ( abundant food supplies , lack of activity ) and decreases when the number of susceptible individuals falls ( by deaths from the complications of diabetes ) . the classic example of an epidemic of diabetes is found on an remote island in the pacific ocean , the island of nauru . before the turn of the 20th century , the lifestyle of nauruans was harsh . the soil was poor , agriculture was difficult , and frequent episodes of starvation were common . despite these adverse conditions , the islanders were noted to be heavy . in 1922 , it was discovered that nauru contained phosphate rock , which was then mined for use in fertilizer , and for which the islanders received royalties . over several decades , the nauruans became extremely wealthy , and with their new-found riches came major lifestyle changes . food was now abundant and could be bought from stores . instead of fishing and farming , nauruans now led sedentary lives . by the 1950s , type 2 diabetes exploded from being non-existent in this population to affecting 2 of 3 adults over the age of 55 and becoming a common cause of death . the case of the nauruans is an extreme case of how type 2 diabetes can rapidly reach epidemic proportions , and thrifty genes may be involved . it has been postulated by neel ( 9 ) that genes that are metabolically thrifty give a survival advantage in times when there is a constant threat of famine and starvation . when food is abundant , these genes aid the efficient metabolism of the food , enabling rapid build up of fat stores . this enabled people like the nauruans to survive food shortages later on . but when food is always abundant , a thrifty genetic makeup turns into a survival disadvantage . thrifty genes cause obesity , which in turn predisposes to diabetes . the epidemic that took hold of the island of nauru is now emerging in developing countries and already has a firm hold on the developed world . physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation overview of glucose metabolism glucose is an essential fuel for the body ( figure 1 ) . the amount of glucose in the bloodstream is regulated by many hormones , the most important being insulin . insulin is the hormone of plentyit is released when glucose is abundant and stimulates the following : muscle and fat cells to remove glucose from the blood cells to breakdown glucose , releasing its energy in the form of atp ( via glycolysis and the citric acid cycle ) the liver and muscle to store glucose as glycogen ( short-term energy reserve ) adipose tissue to store glucose as fat ( long-term energy reserve ) cells to use glucose in protein synthesis glucagon is the main hormone opposing the action of insulin and is released when food is scarce . whereas insulin triggers the formation of glycogen ( an energy-requiring process , or an anabolic effect ) , glucagon triggers glycogen breakdown , which releases energy ( a catabolic effect ) . glucagon also helps the body to switch to using resources other than glucose , such as fat and protein ( figure 2 ) . regulation of blood glucose blood glucose levels are not constant they rise and fall depending on the body 's needs , regulated by hormones . this results in glucose levels normally ranging from 70 to 110 mg/dl . the blood glucose level can rise for three reasons : diet , breakdown of glycogen , or through hepatic synthesis of glucose . eating produces a rise in blood glucose , the extent of which depends on a number of factors such as the amount and the type of carbohydrate eaten ( i.e . , the glycemic index ) , the rate of digestion , and the rate of absorption . because glucose is a polar molecule , its absorption across the hydrophobic gut wall requires specialized glucose transporters ( gluts ) of which there are five types . in the gut , glut2 and glut5 are the most common . the liver is a major producer of glucose it releases glucose from the breakdown of glycogen and also makes glucose from intermediates of carbohydrate , protein , and fat metabolism . the liver is also a major consumer of glucose and can buffer glucose levels . it receives glucose-rich blood directly from the digestive tract via the portal vein ( figure 3 ) . the liver quickly removes large amounts of glucose from the circulation so that even after a meal , the blood glucose levels rarely rise above 110 mg/dl in a non-diabetic.6 genetic landscape of diabetes figure . overview of glucose metabolism . glucose is used for many purposes in the body . it can be converted into energy via pyruvate and the tricarboxylic acid ( tca ) cycle , as well as being converted to fat ( long-term storage ) and glycogen ( short-term storage ) . some amino acids may also be synthesized directly from pyruvate ; thus , glucose may also indirectly contribute to protein synthesis . figure 2. anabolism and catabolism of glucose . glucose metabolism involves both energy-producing ( catabolic , shown in orange ) and energy-consuming ( anabolic , shown in green ) processes . introduction to diabetes 7 box . the liver buffers glucose levels . the liver receives glucose-rich blood from the digestive tract via the portal vein ( figure 3 ) . the liver has a high amount of glut2 transporters that do not need the presence of insulin to transport glucose into the liver cells . glut2 has a low affinity for glucose which enables a rapid influx of glucose when sugar levels are high . therefore , in the liver , levels of glucose inside and outside the cell can become equal ( an equilibrium is reached ) . the first step for trapping glucose inside the cell involves phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate ( g6 p ) . the liver differs from the rest of the body in that it uses the enzyme glucokinase , rather than hexokinase . glucokinase can produce g6 pat a faster rate and also is not inhibited by its product ( this is because in the liver , g6 pcan be channeled into making glycogen ) . glucose and insulin both modulate metabolic enzymes in such a way that glycogen formation is promoted . this drives forward the process of bringing more glucose into the liver . insulin promotes glycogen synthesis by stimulating glycogen synthetase and inhibiting glycogen phosphorylase . after a mealthe role of insulin the rise in blood glucose following a meal is detected by the pancreatic beta cells , which respond by releasing insulin . insulin increases the uptake and use of glucose by tissues such as skeletal muscle and fat cells . this rise in glucose also inhibits the release of glucagon , inhibiting the production of glucose from other sources , e.g . , glycogen break down ( figure 4 ) . 1. use glucose once inside the cell , some of the glucose is used immediately via glycolysis . this is a central pathway of carbohydrate metabolism because it occurs in all cells in the body , and because all sugars can be converted into glucose and enter this pathway . during the well-fed state , the high levels of insulin and low levels of glucagon figure 3. the portal circulation . the portal vein drains almost all of the blood from the digestive tract and empties directly into the liver . this circulation of nutrient- rich blood between the gut and liver is called the portal circulation . it enables the liver to remove any harmful substances that may have been digested before the blood enters the main blood circulation around the body the systemic circulation . genetic landscape of diabetes stimulate glycolysis , which releases energy and produces carbohydrate intermediates that can be used in other metabolic pathways . glycolysis in stryer 's biochemistry . make glycogen any glucose that is not used immediately is taken up by the liver and muscle where it can be converted into glycogen ( glycogenesis ) . insulin stimulates glycogenesis in the liver by : stimulating hepatic glycogen synthetase ( the enzyme that catalyzes glycogen synthesis in the liver ) inhibiting hepatic glycogen phosphorylase ( the enzyme that catalyzes glycogen breakdown in the liver ) inhibiting glucose synthesis from other sources ( inhibits gluconeogenesis ) insulin also encourages glycogen formation in muscle , but by a different method . here it increases the number of glucose transporters ( glut4 ) on the cell surface . this leads to a rapid uptake of glucose that is converted into muscle glycogen . changes in key hormones after a meal . changes in blood levels of glucose , insulin , and glucagon after a carbohyrate-rich meal ( ingested at time 0 minutes ) . glycogen metabolism in stryer 's biochemistry . make fat when glycogen stores are fully replenished , excess glucose is converted into fat in a process called lipogenesis . glucose is converted into fatty acids that are stored as triglycerides ( three fatty acid molecules attached to one glycerol molecule ) for storage . insulin promotes lipogenesis by : increasing the number of glucose transporters ( glut4 ) expressed on the surface of the fat cell , causing a rapid uptake of glucose increasing lipoprotein lipase activity , which frees up more fatty acids for triglyceride synthesis in addition to promoting fat synthesis , insulin also inhibits fat breakdown by inhibiting hormone-sensitive lipase ( an enzyme that breaks down fat stores ) . as a result , there are lower levels of fatty acids in the blood stream . fatty acid metabolism in stryer 's biochemistry insulin also has an anabolic effect on protein metabolism . it stimulates the entry of amino acids into cells and stimulates protein production from amino acids . fasting the role of glucagon fasting is defined as more than eight hours without food . the resulting fall in blood sugar levels inhibits insulin secretion and stimulates glucagon release . glucagon opposes many actions of insulin . most importantly , glucagon raises blood sugar levels by stimulating the mobilization of glycogen stores in the liver , providing a rapid burst of glucose . in 1018 hours , the glycogen stores are depleted , and if fasting continues , glucagon continues to stimulate glucose production by favoring the hepatic uptake of amino acids , the carbon skeletons of which are used to make glucose . in addition to low blood glucose levels , many other stimuli stimulate glucagon release including eating a protein- rich meal ( the presence of amino acids in the stomach stimulates the release of both insulin and glucagon , glucagon prevents hypoglycemia that could result from unopposed insulin ) and stress ( the body anticipates an increased glucose demand in times of stress ) . starvation the metabolic state of starvation in the us a is more commonly found in people trying to lose weight rapidly or in those who are too unwell to eat . after a couple of days without food , the liver will have exhausted its stores of glycogen but continues to make glucose from protein ( amino acids ) and fat ( glycerol ) . the metabolism of fatty acids ( from adipose tissue ) is a major source of energy for organs such as the liver . fatty acids are broken down to acetyl-co a , which is channeled into the citric acid cycle and generates atp . as starvation continues , the levels of acetyl-co a increase until the oxidative capacity of the citric acid cycle is exceeded . the liver processes these excess fatty acids into ketone bodies ( 3-hydroxybutyrate ) to be used by many tissues as an energy source . the most important organ that relies on ketone production is the brain because it is unable to metabolize fatty acids . during the first few days of starvation , the brain uses glucose as a fuel . if starvation continues for more than two weeks , the level of circulating ketone bodies is high enough to be used by the brain . this slows down the need for glucose production from amino acid skeletons , thus slowing down the loss of essential proteins . diabetes is often referred to as starvation in the midst of plenty because the intracellular levels of glucose are low , although the extracellular levels may be extremely high . as in starvation , type diabetics use non-glucose sources of energy , such as fatty acids and ketone bodies , in their peripheral tissues . but in contrast to the starvation state , the production of ketone bodies can spiral out of control . because the ketones are weak acids , they acidify the blood . the result is the metabolic state of diabetic ketoacidosis ( dka ) . hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis are the hallmark of type 1 diabetes ( figure 5 ) . hypertriglyceridemia is also seen in dka . the liver combines triglycerol with protein to form very low density lipoprotein ( vldl ) . it then releases vld linto the blood . in diabetics , the enzyme that normally degrades lipoproteins ( lipoprotein lipase ) is inhibited by the low level of insulin and the high level of glucagon . as a result , the levels of vldl and chylomicrons ( made from lipid from the diet ) are high in dka . low-carbohydrate diet low-carbohydrate diets , such as the atkins and south beach diets , are currently popular ways to lose weight . such diet plans involve restricting the type and amount of carbohydrate eaten . one of the earliest descriptions of a low-carbohydrate diet was by william banting in the 1860s in england . at the age of 66 , banting found success in following a carbohydrate-restricted diet : in the course of one year , he lost 46 pounds of his initial weight of 202 pounds . his impression was that any starchy or saccharine matter tends to the disease of corpulence in advanced life . he claimed he was never hungry and that the great charms and comfort of the system are that its effects are palpable within a week of trial and creates a natural stimulus to persevere for a few weeks more . in a recent small trial , 63 obese men and women were assigned to either a low-carbohydrate diet or a low-fat diet ( 1 ) . people on both diets lost weight . the carbohydrate-restricted group initially lost weight at a faster rate , but when reviewed at the end of the year there was no significant difference in weight loss between the two groups ( 1 ) . it was found that low-carbohydrate dieters ( who were allowed unrestricted amounts of protein and fat ) actually had a lower energy intake than the low-fat diets ( who were limited in their calorie intake ) . it may be that when carbohydrates are restricted , weight loss is due to a lower calorie intake due to the monotony of the diet . it is also possible that the lower calorie intake may be because of a change in peripheral or central satiety signals , leaving people feeling more full after a meal . a second study compared the effects of a carbohydrate-restricted diet on the risk of developing atherosclerosis ( 2 ) . 132 severely obese men and women were assigned to either a low-carbohydrate or low-fat diet . again , after a 6-month period both groups lost weight . they became more sensitive to insulin , and their triglyceride ( tg ) levels , a type of fat that is a risk factor for atherosclerosis , improved . however , the carbohydrate-restricted group lost more weight and showed a greater improvement in insulin sensitivity and tg levels . after one year , the weight loss between the two groups was similar , but the cardiogenic risk factors were improved in the low- carbohydrate dieters , tg levels were lower , and levels of hdl cholesterol , a type of fat that protects against atherosclerosis , were higher ( 3 ) . also , long-term sugar control , which can be measured by checking for the amount of glycosylated hemoglobin ( hb a1c ) , was better in people on the low-carbohydrate diet . however , it remains unclear whether these beneficial effects would continue after 1 year . at present , the risks of obesity are well known , and the benefits of weight loss by traditional low-calorie , low-fat , and high-complex carbohydrate diets are also well documented . future research will clarify the long-term outcomes of a low-carbohydrate diet for achieving and maintaining a healthy weight together with the effects on the heart and other systems of the body . insulin synthesis the insulin-making cells of the body are called beta cells , and they are found in the pancreas gland . these cells clump together to form the `` islets of langerhans `` , named for the german medical student who described them . the synthesis of insulin begins at the translation of the insulin gene , which resides on chromosome 11. during translation , two introns are spliced out of the m rna product , which encodes a protein of 110 amino acids in length . this primary translation product is called preproinsulin and is inactive . it contains a signal peptide of 24 amino acids in length , which is required for the protein to cross the cell membrane . once the preproinsulin reaches the endoplasmic reticulum , a protease cleaves off the signal peptide to create proinsulin . proinsulin consists of three domains : an amino-terminal b chain , a carboxyl-terminal a chain , and a connecting peptide in the middle known as the c-peptide . metabolic changes in diabetic ketoacidosis . hyperglycemia is caused by the increased production of glucose by the liver ( driven by glucagon ) and the decreased use of glucose of insulin by peripheral tissues ( because of the lack of insulin ) . proinsulin is exposed to several specific peptidases that remove the c- peptide and generate the mature and active form of insulin . in the golgi apparatus , insulin and free c-peptide are packaged into secretory granules , which accumulate in the cytoplasm of the beta cells . exocytosis of the granules is triggered by the entry of glucose into the beta cells . the secretion of insulin has a broad impact on metabolism . insulin structure in , frederick sanger was awarded his first nobel prize for determining the sequence of the amino acids that make up insulin . this marked the first time that a protein had had the order of its amino acids ( the primary sequence ) determined . insulin is composed of two chains of amino acids named chain a ( 21 amino acids ) and chain b ( 30 amino acids ) that are linked together by two disulfide bridges . there is a 3rd disulfide bridge within the a chain that links the 6th and 11th residues of the a chain together . in most species , the length and amino acid compositions of chains a and bare similar , and the positions of the three disulfide bonds are highly conserved . for this reason , pig insulin can be used to replace deficient human insulin levels in diabetes patients . today , porcine insulin has largely been replaced by the mass production of human proinsulin by bacteria ( recombinant insulin ) . insulin molecules have a tendency to form dimers in solution , and in the presence of zinc ions , insulin dimers associate into hexamers . whereas monomers of insulin readily diffuse through the blood and have a rapid effect , hexamers diffuse slowly and have a delayed onset of action . in the design of recombinant insulin , the structure of insulin can be modified in a way that reduces the tendency of the insulin molecule to form dimers and hexamers but that does not interrupt binding to the insulin receptor . in this way , a range of preparations of insulin is made , varying from short acting to long acting . insulin secretion rising levels of glucose inside the pancreatic beta cells trigger the release of insulin . glucose is transported into the beta cell by type 2 glucose transporters ( glut2 ) . once inside , the first step in glucose metabolism is the phosphorylation of glucose to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this step is catalyzed by glucokinase it is the rate-limiting step in glycolysis , and it effectively traps glucose inside the cell . 2.as glucose metabolism proceeds , atp is produced in the mitochondria . 3.the increase in the atp : adp ratio closes atp-gated potassium channels in the beta cell membrane . positively charged potassium ions ( k+ ) are now prevented from leaving the beta cell . 4.the rise in positive charge inside the beta cell causes depolarization . 5.voltage-gated calcium channels open , allowing calcium ions ( ca2+ ) to flood into the cell . 6.the increase in intracellular calcium concentration triggers the secretion of insulin via exocytosis . there are two phases of insulin release in response to a rise in glucose . the first is an immediate release of insulin . this is attributable to the release of preformed insulin , which is stored in secretory granules . after a short delay , there is a second , more prolonged release of newly synthesized insulin . once released , insulin is active for a only a brief time before it is degraded by enzymes . Insulinase found in the liver and kidneys breaks down insulin circulating in the plasma , and as a result , insulin has a half-life of only about 6 minutes . this short duration of action allows rapid changes in the circulating levels of insulin . insulin receptor the net effect of insulin binding is to trigger a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions . these actions are terminated by dephosphorylation of the insulin receptor . similar to the receptors for other polypeptide hormones , the receptor for insulin is embedded in the plasma membrane and is composed of a pair of alpha subunits and a pair of beta subunits . the alpha subunits are extracellular and contain the insulin-binding site . the beta subunits span the membrane and contain the enzyme tyrosine kinase . kinases are a group of enzymes that phosphorylate proteins ( the reverse reaction is catalyzed by a group of enzymes called phosphatases ) . insulin binding to the alpha subunits induces a conformational change that is transmitted to the beta subunits and causes them to phosphorylate themselves ( autophosphorylation ) . a specific tyrosine of each beta subunit is phosphorylated along with other target proteins , such as insulin receptor substrate ( irs ) . as these and other proteins inside the cell are phosphorylated , this in turn alters their activity , bringing about the wide biological effects of insulin . insulin action the binding of insulin results in a wide range of actions that take place over different periods of time . almost immediately , insulin promotes the uptake of glucose into many tissues that express glut4 glucose transporters , such as skeletal muscle and fat . insulin increases the activity of these transporters and increases their numbers by stimulating their recruitment from an intracellular pool to the cell surface . not all tissues require insulin for glucose uptake . tissues such as liver cells , red blood cells , the gut mucosa , the kidneys , and cells of the nervous system use a glucose transporter that is not insulin dependent . over minutes to hours , insulin alters the activity of various enzymes as a result of changes in their phosphorylation status . over a period of days , insulin increases the amounts of many metabolic enzymes . these reflect an increase in gene transcription , m rna , and enzyme synthesis . the insulin receptor . the insulin receptor is a tyrosine kinase receptor and is composed of a pair of alpha subunits and a pair of beta subunits . insulin binds to the alpha subunits and induces a conformational change that is transmitted to the beta subunits that autophosphorylate and initiate a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions . type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disorder in which the body attacks its pancreatic beta cells . the onset of type 1 diabetes is attributed to both an inherited risk and external triggers , such as diet or an infection . the hunt for these genetic and enviromental risk factors is on-going . about 18 regions of the genome have been linked with influencing type 1 diabetes risk . these regions , each of which may contain several genes , have been labeled iddm1 to iddm18 . the most well studied is iddm1 , which contains the hla genes that encode immune response proteins . variations in hla genes are an important genetic risk factor , but they alone do not account for the disease and other genes are involved . there are two other non-hla genes which have been identified thus far . one of these non-hla genes , iddm2 , is the insulin gene , and the other non-hla gene maps close to ctla4 , which has a regulatory role in the immune response . iddm1 contains the hla genes summary hla genes encode molecules that are crucial to the immune system . these molecules hold small chains of amino acids on the cell surface so that immune cells can analyze these chains . when the immune cells find an inappropriate chain , they begin attacking . without hla genes , immune cells would not find the chains of viruses , bacteria , or tumor cells . on the other hand , inheriting certain versions ( alleles ) of the hla genes increases the probability that immune cells will attack the body 's healthy cells . this is how iddm1 contributes to the immune attack of the beta cells and thus type 1 diabetes . background the hla region is a cluster of genes on chromosome 6. the genes encode glycoproteins that are found on the surfaces of most cells and help the immune system to distinguish between self ( its own cells , e.g . , beta cells of the pancreas ) and non-self ( e.g . , bacteria , viruses ) . autoimmune disease results when the immune system launches an attack against the body 's tissues . the risk of developing autoimmune disease is sometimes related to the alleles of hla genes in the body . type 1 diabetes is unique among these diseases in that hla alleles may increase the risk of diabetes , have no effect , or even be protective . the hla genes encode proteins called major histocompatibility complex ( mhc ) , and there are two main classes of mhc proteins , both of which display chains of amino acids . the chains are called antigens , and immune cells ( called tcells ) analyze them . mhc present chains from inside cells , whereas mhc present chains from outside the cells . if tcells bind to the chain presented on an mhc , the tcell immediately orchestrates powerful attacks by the body 's other immune cells . ideally , the body only contains tcells that bind to chains from infectious organisms ( viruses , bacteria , etc . ) and tumor cells . healthy development largely achieves this ideal . the alternative is found in autoimmune diseases such as diabetes : tcells bind to chains from the body 's healthy cells . there are many different alleles of the hla genes , leading to many different variants of mhc proteins and allowing a variety of chains to be presented to cells . the inheritance of particular hla alleles can account for 17 over half of the genetic risk of developing type diabetes ( 1 ) . the genes encoding mhc proteins are most strongly linked with diabetes , and these genes are called hla-dr , hla-dq , and hla-dp . in the general population , only half of the people inherit a copy ( allele ) of dr gene called dr3 and dr4 , and less than 3 % of the people have two alleles . however , in type 1 diabetes at least one allele of dr3 or dr4 is found in 95 % of caucasians , and individuals with both dr3 and dr4 are particularly susceptible to type 1 diabetes ( 2 ) . conversely , the dr2 allele is protective ( 3 ) . similar to the dr gene , certain alleles of the dq gene are risk factors for developing the disease , whereas other alleles of dq are protective . there is also a tendency for people who inherit dr3 or dr4 to inherit dq , which adds to their genetic risk of developing diabetes . conversely , the protective alleles of dr and dq tend to be inherited together . these tendencies have complicated the study of the effects of individual hla-dr or hla-dq genes . iddm1 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on iddm1 and diabetes , search pub med . associations between hlaalleles and diabetes began to be documented in the 1970s when serological markers were used . this association was later confirmed with genome-wide scans . the iddm1 locus contains many diabetes susceptibility genes , and it remains difficult to identify the specific risk alleles because of linkage disequilibrium ; certain alleles tend to be co-inherited with other alleles , making it difficult to distinguish between the effects of either on diabetes susceptibility . fine mapping of these regions suggests that the two alleles dqb1 and drb1 are the most important ( 4 ) . alleles in the dqb1 gene are often tightly associated with alleles in the drb1 gene , and variants of both or either allele may confer an increased risk of diabetes . sequences in the dqb1 gene that code for an amino acid other than aspartic acid at position 57 ( non-asp57 ) are highly associated with type 1 diabetes ( 5 ) . crystal structures suggest that loss of aspartic acid at this position creates an `` oxyanion hole `` . this may be occupied by the tcell during the interaction between hla and the t- cell receptor ( 6 ) . the diabetes risk of non-asp57 is further increased when the haplotype also contains the drb1 * 0401 allele , suggesting the possible existence of at least two separate loci of susceptibility ( 7 ) . one of the protective hla haplotypes is dqa1 * 0102 , dqb1 * 0602. approximately 20 % of americans and europeans have this haplotype , whereas less than 1 % of children with type 1 diabetes do ( 8 ) . A well-known marker for type 1 diabetes is the presence of islet cell autoantibodies . however , even in the presence of islet cell autoantibodies , the haplotype dq a1 * 0102 , dq b1 * 0602 has a protective effect . but once the diabetes disease process begins , the mechanism that protected these individuals from diabetes is lost , suggesting that inheriting these alleles does not prevent diabetes but may somehow delay or arrest the progression of the disease ( 9 ) . insulin is a hormone that has a wide range of effects on metabolism . its overall action is to encourage the body to store energy rather than use it , e.g . , insulin favors the storage of glucose as glycogen or fat as opposed to breaking down glucose to release atp . for a summary of the actions of insulin , see the physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation genetic factors in type 1 diabetes . insulin is composed of two distinct polypeptide chains , chain a and chain b , which are linked by disulfide bonds . many proteins that contain subunits , such as hemoglobin , are the products of several genes . however , insulin is the product of one gene , ins . Ins actually encodes an inactive precursor called preproinsulin . preproinsulin is processed into proinsulin by removal of a signaling peptide ; however , proinsulin is also inactive . the final processing step involves removal of a c-peptide ( a connecting peptide that links chain a to chain b ) , and this process produces the mature and active form of insulin . molecular information several species , including the rat , mouse , and some species of fish , have two insulin genes . in contrast , in humans there is a single insulin gene that is located on chromosome . it has three exons ( coding regions ) that span about 2,200 bases . exon 2 encodes the b chain , along with the signal peptide and part of the c-peptide found in the precursors of insulin . exon 3 encodes the a chain and the remainder of the c-peptide . c-peptide is secreted in equal amounts to insulin , but it has long been thought that it has no biological role . however , in diabetic rats c-peptide has been shown to reduce the dysfunction of blood vessels and the nervous system that is common in diabetes ( 1 ) . c-peptide contains the greatest variation among species , whereas regions of insulin that bind to the insulin receptor are highly conserved . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the ins gene , none ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein ( see the allelic variants that are known to be associated with disease ) . a blast search using human proinsulin precursor as a query finds proteins in 107 different species , which are all metazoans apart from three plants and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . short alleles are associated with a higher risk of developing type 1 diabetes , whereas the longer class alleles are protective . the presence of at least one class allele is associated with a 3-fold reduction in the risk of type 1 diabetes . immature tcells are presented with chains of amino acids , such as insulin , and tcells that form a response to them ( and thus are autoreactive ) are deleted . because the longer vntrs cause more insulin to be produced in the thymus , the detection and deletion of autoreactive tcells may be more efficient . this improved immune tolerance to insulin would lessen the risk of a future onset of type 1 diabetes caused by anti-insulin antibodies . link roundup for iddm2 live searches diabetes and insulin in pub med pub med central books background information insulin in omimmolecular biology iddm2 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer insulin domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene . location of ins on the human genome . Ins maps to chromosome 11 , approximately between 2144 and 2148 kilobases ( kb ) . click on the figure or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ins in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of ins may fluctuate ; therefore , the live web site may not appear exactly . the remaining type 1 diabetes susceptibility loci , iddm3 iddm18 , were mainly discovered by genome scan linkage studies , e.g . , looking for linkage between regions of the genome and disease in affected sib-pairs . the iddm loci are found on several different chromosomes and contain many genes , many of which have now been identified . some of these genes are suspected to play a role in susceptibility to type 1 diabetes , and they are discussed below . iddm3 no diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm3 locus , which is found on chromosome . iddm4 several potential candidate genes lie near the iddm4 locus on chromosome 11. these include zfm1 ( zinc finger protein 162 ) , which encodes a transcription factor found in the pancreas , and fadd ( fas-associated death protein ) . the transmission of the `` cell death `` signal involves the interaction between fas and fadd , and in type 1 diabetes , the apoptosis of pancreatic beta cells may involve the fadd . apoptosis of the beta cell may be triggered by the binding of fas ( expressed on the beta cell ) with fas ligand ( expressed on the cytotoxic tcell ) ( 1 ) . other candidate genes in this region include lrp5 , which encodes a novel transmembrane protein that is similar to receptors belonging to the low-density lipoprotein family ( 2 ) . iddm5 the region of chromosome 6 that contains the iddm5 locus includes the sod2 gene , which encodes mitochondrial superoxide dismutase . sod2 metabolizes harmful oxygen free radicals , which are intermediates in many biological reactions , and converts them into less reactive and less harmful molecules . there is some evidence that free oxygen radicals may play a role in the destruction of beta cells . enzymes such as sod2 may therefore offer protection against type 1 diabetes , and genetic variants of sod2 may increase susceptibility to disease ( 1 ) . iddm6 several candidate diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm6 locus . they include a gene associated with colorectal cancer ( dcc ) that may be linked with autoimmune disease , a gene that encodes a zinc finger dna binding domain ( znf236 ) that may be linked with diabetic kidney disease , and a molecule that opposes apoptosis ( bcl-2 ) ( 1 ) . iddm7 within the iddm7 locus on chromosome 2 are several candidate diabetes risk genes . one is neurod1 ( 3 ) , a transcription factor that is expressed widely in the developing brain and pancreas . neurod1 regulates the transcription of the insulin gene , and in addition to its association with type 1 diabetes , variants of this gene have been implicated in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes ; a mutation of this gene causes mody6 . other genes located within the iddm7 locus include igrp ( islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit-related protein ) , which encodes the beta cell-specific version of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase . Igrph as emerged as a major target of cell-mediated autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes ( 4 ) . many other candidate genes ( interleukin-1 gene cluster , hoxd8 , gad1 , galnt3 ) in this region have been investigated but none of these genes have been shown to be associated with type 1 diabetes ( 1 ) . iddm8 no diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm8 locus , which is found on chromosome 6. iddm9 the symbol iddm9 has not yet been approved.genetic factors in type 1 diabetes 23 iddm10 the gene gad2 is closely linked to the region of chromosome designated as iddm10 . glutamic acid decarboxylase ( gad ) catalyzes formation of the neurotransmitter gaba . targeting of this enzyme by autoantibodies has been implicated in the pathogenesis of stiff-man syndrome and type 1 diabetes . both diseases feature insulin deficiency , but stiff-man syndrome also bears the features of an autoimmune attack against the central nervous system , characterized by painful muscle spasms and increasing stiffness of axial muscles . the difference between stiff-man syndrome and type 1 diabetes may be because gadis expressed in two different isoforms : one is expressed in the central nervous system , and the other is in the beta cells ( 7 ) . the nature of the immune attack against these two isoforms also appears to be different ( 8 ) . the gad2 gene encodes gad65 , and this protein contains a 24-amino acid segment that is similar to an amino acid sequence found in the coxsackie virus , a suspected environmental trigger for the onset of type 1 diabetes . autoimmunity in iddm may thus arise by `` molecular mimicry `` between gad and a viral polypeptide ( 9 ) . however , evidence of cross-reactivity has not been demonstrated in immune cells from patients with diabetes . autoantibodies against gad have been found in patients who have had preclinical type 1 diabetes ( 10 ) . in the type 1 diabetes mouse , the expression of gad by beta cells is required for the development of autoimmune diabetes . complete suppression of beta-cell gad expression blocks the generation of diabetogenic tcells , leading to the theory that modulation of gad might have therapeutic value in type 1 diabetes ( 11 ) . iddm11 one candidate gene in the iddm11 locus is the ensagene , which encodes alpha-endosulphine . this protein is thought to be an endogenous regulator of the beta cell potassium channel ( katp channel ) . the katp channels co-ordinate a rise in blood glucose with insulin secretion . as glucose levels rise , the corresponding rise in atps huts the channel , leading to a change in membrane polarity . voltage-sensitive calcium channels flip open , allowing ca2+ ions to enter into the beta cells , triggering exocytosis of insulin . the katp channel pore is encoded by the kirgene , and the channel is regulated by the sulfonylurea receptor encoded by the abcc8 gene . recombinant alpha-endosulphine has been shown to inhibit the binding of the diabetes drug sulfonylurea to its receptor , to reduce the flow of k+ through the katp channel , and to stimulate insulin secretion ( 12 ) . another candidate gene in this region is the sel1 l gene . it is a negative regulator of the notch signalling pathway which controls the differentiation of pancreatic endocrine cells ( 13 ) . iddm12 several candidate genes have been located in the iddm12 locus , and the strongest candidates encode co- stimulatory receptors on the tcell . when the tcell is presented with a chain of amino acids , its t-cell receptor binds to the hla molecules that are presenting the chains . for the tcell to become fully activated , there is additional signaling between co-stimulatory receptors and corresponding ligands on the antigen-presenting cell . these co-stimulatory receptors are encoded by the candidate genes for type 1 diabetes susceptibility ctla4 , cd28 , and icos . read more about the role of ctla4 in type 1 diabetes . iddm13 several iddm13 candidate genes have been investigated , but variants of these genes have yet to be associated with type 1 diabetes.24 genetic landscape of diabetes iddm14 the symbol iddm14 has not yet been approved . iddm15 the iddm15 locus has been linked with type diabetes , and mutations near this region are associated with a rare form of diabetes called transient neonatal diabetes ( 14 ) . iddm16 one of the candidate genes in the iddm16 locus is the immunoglobulin heavy chain . immunoglobulins ( antibodies ) have a central role in the immune response against foreign antigens and in error can also attack self-antigens , resulting in autoimmune disease . immunoglobulins are known to interact with hla molecules , variants of which are associated with diabetes protection or susceptibility ( iddm1 contains the hla genes ) . immunoglobulins are composed of two heavy chains and two light chains , and the iddm16 locus contains the gene that encodes the heavy chain . genetically controlled differences in the immunoglobulin heavy chain may affect an individual 's immune response to self-antigens and thus alter the risk of developing autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes ( 1 ) . iddm17 the iddm17 locus was discovered to be linked to type 1 diabetes , but the candidate gene ( s ) is not yet known . the fas gene maps to this genomic area , but it has been excluded as a possible diabetes susceptibility gene . iddm18 acandidate diabetes susceptibility gene in the iddm18 locus is ilb12 . this gene encodes a subunit of il-12p40 , a signaling molecule secreted by white blood cells . in animal models , il-12 plays an important role in the induction of diabetes . in humans , variation in il-12p40 production may influence the reactivity of tcells and initiate or protect against autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes . an inhibitor of the immune response ( ctla4 ) summary immune cells are continually analyzing small chains of amino acids to detect infectious agents or tumor cells . when a foreign chain is found , the immune cells become activated and begin to attack . the ctla4 gene encodes a molecule that hinders the activation of immune cells . the region of the chromosome that contains ctla4 has been linked with susceptibility to many autoimmune diseases including type 1 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : cytotoxic t-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 official gene symbol : ctla4 alias : cd152 background one of the steps in mounting an immune response involves an interaction between two cells . the first cell , called the antigen-presenting cell ( apc ) , displays small chains of amino acids ( antigens ) on its surface , and they present these antigens to the second type of cell , tcells . once the tcell has analyzed the antigen , it can either become activated and launch an immune attack or be deactivated . in a healthy immune system , tcells become activated only to foreign antigens , such as fragments from bacteria or viruses . if the tcells become activated in response to self-antigens , autoimmune diseases such as diabetes results . optimal activation of the tcell requires a two-way interaction between the t-cell receptor and the antigen ( the first signal ) and between co-stimulatory receptors on the surface of the tcell with co-stimulatory ligands expressed by apcs ( the second signal ) . failure of the tcell to receive a second signal can lead to its deactivation . one of the co-stimulatory molecules on the tcell is called cytotoxic tlymphocyte-associated antigen ( ctla4 ) . ctla4 has a negative regulatory effect on the immune system because it down-regulates t-cell activation by interfering with the second signal . mice with a targeted disruption of the ctla4 gene develop a fatal disorder characterized by massive lymphocyte proliferation ( 1 ) . unlike other co-stimulator receptors on the tcell , ctla4 is only expressed when the tcell has been activated after antigen presentation . because it is only expressed in activated tcells , and because it down regulates the function of tcells , it is likely that ctla4 has a role in guarding against autoimmunity ( 2 ) . loss of this gene may result in activated tcells attacking self-antigens . indeed , genetic variants of ctla4 have been linked with autoimmune disorders such as autoimmune hypothyroid disease , graves ' disease ( 3 ) , systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) ( 4 ) , celiac disease ( 5 ) , and type 1 diabetes ( 6-8 ) . molecular information ctl4 amaps to iddm12 on chromosome 2 , and the equivalent area of the mouse genome has been linked to type 1 diabetes in the non-obese diabetic ( nod ) mouse ( 9 ) . it has four exons ( coding regions ) that span around 7,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 223 amino acids . the ctla4 protein contains an immunoglobulin v-like domain . a transmembrane region , and a putative cytoplasmic region that is identical to the mouse ctla4 protein . this conservation of the cytoplasmic region between species suggests that it has an important role in the functioning of ctla4 ( 10 ) . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the ctla4 gene , two ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein ( figure 2 ) . none of these variants have yet to be associated with disease ( see known allelic variants ) . a blast search using human ctla4 as a query finds proteins in 19 different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . ctla4 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on ctla4 and diabetes , search pub med . there are several snps in the 3 ' untranslated region of the ctla4 sequence that have been implicated in determining the risk for several common autoimmune disorders , including type 1 diabetes . one of the snps , termed ct60 , encodes a genotype that is either protective ( a/a ) or predisposes ( g/g ) toward autoimmune disease . the disease susceptibility gallele is common , being found in 50 % of individuals without autoimmune disorders , and is more common in individuals with graves ' disease ( 63 % ) . the g/ghaplotype correlated with lower production of the soluble alternative splice from of ctla4 ( s ctla4 ) compared with the protective a/ahaplotype . this reduction of s ctla4 levels could lead to reduced blocking of signals between tcells and apcs , leading to increased activation of tcells . this allele was also associated with type 1 diabetes but the effect was small ( 11 ) .genetic factors in type 1 diabetes 27 link roundup for ctla4 live searches diabetes and ctla4 in pub med pub med central books background information ctla4 in omimmolecular biology ctla4 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer immunoglobulin v-type domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure . location of ctla4 on the human genome . ctla4 maps to chromosome 2 , approximately between 204,930 and 204,945 kilobases ( kb ) . click on the image or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ctla4 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of ctla4 may fluctuate . type 2 diabetes has been loosely defined as `` adult onset `` diabetes , although as diabetes becomes more common throughout the world , cases of type 2 diabetes are being observed in younger people . it is increasingly common in children . in determining the risk of developing diabetes , environmental factors such as food intake and exercise play an important role . the majority of individuals with type 2 diabetes are either overweight or obese . inherited factors are also important , but the genes involved remain poorly defined . in rare forms of diabetes , mutations of one gene can result in disease . however , in type 2 diabetes , many genes are thought to be involved . `` diabetes genes `` may show only a subtle variation in the gene sequence , and these variations may be extremely common . the difficulty lies in linking such common gene variations , known as single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) , with an increased risk of developing diabetes . one method of finding the diabetes susceptibility genes is by whole-genome linkage studies . the entire genome of affected family members is scanned , and the families are followed over several generations and/or large numbers of affected sibling-pairs are studied . associations between parts of the genome and the risk of developing diabetes are looked for . to date only two genes , calpain 10 ( capn10 ) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha ( hnf4 a ) , have been identified by this method . the sulfonylurea receptor ( abcc8 ) summary sulfonylureas are a class of drugs used to lower blood glucose in the treatment of type 2 diabetes . these drugs interact with the sulfonylurea receptor of pancreatic beta cells and stimulate insulin release . the sulfonylurea receptor is encoded by the abcc8 gene , and genetic variation of abcc8 may impair the release of insulin . nomenclature official name : atp-binding cassette , sub-family c , member 8 official gene symbol : abcc8 alias : sulfonylurea receptor , sur , sur1 background the protein encoded by the abcc8 gene is a member of the atp-binding cassette transporters . these proteins use energy in the form of atp to drive the transport of various molecules across cell membranes . abcc8 belongs to a subfamily of transporters that contains the chloride channel that is mutated in cystic fibrosis ( cftr ) and also the proteins that are involved in multi-drug resistance . read more : the human atp-binding cassette ( abc ) transporter superfamily the abcc8 protein is also known as the sulfonylurea urea receptor ( sur ) . suris one of the proteins that composes the atp-sensitive potassium channel ( katp channel ) found in the pancreas ( 1 ) . the other protein , called kir6.2 , forms the core of the channel and is encoded by the kcnj11 gene . katp channels play a central role in glucose-induced insulin secretion by linking signals derived from glucose metabolism ( a rise in atp ) to membrane depolarization ( due to katp channels closing ) and the secretion of insulin.31 the activity of the katp channel regulates the release of insulin . the sulfonylureas are drugs that can modulate katp channel activity and are used in the treatment of type diabetes . by binding to sur , they inhibit the channel and stimulate the release of insulin . this leads to a lowering of blood glucose levels . the activity of the katp channel is also modulated by the subtype of sur ( sur , also known as sur1 , is encoded by abcc8 ; or sur2 a and sur2 b , which are encoded by abcc9 ) . in the pancreas , most katp channels are thought to be a complex of four sur1 proteins and four kir6.2 proteins . mutations in either abcc8 or kcnj11 can result in up-regulated insulin secretion , a condition termed familial persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) ( 2-4 ) . genetic variation in abcc8 has also been implicated in the impaired release of insulin that is seen in type 2 diabetes . molecular information abc genes are found in many different eukaryotic species and are highly conserved between species , indicating that many of these genes existed early in eukaryotic evolution . A blast search using human abcc8 as a query finds proteins in 30 different species , which include multicellular organisms ( metazoans ) , fungi , and plants . potential true homologous genes have been identified in the mouse and rat . by fluorescence in situ hybridization , it was found that the abbc8 gene maps to the short arm of chromosome 11. it has 41 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 84,000 bases . the abc transporter proteins , such as abcc8 , typically contain two atp-binding domains and two transmembrane domains . the atp-binding domains are also known as nucleotide binding folds ( nbfs ) , and mutations in either nbf1 or nbf2 can lead to phi . this suggests that both nbfregions of the surare needed for the normal regulation of katpchannel activity . as found in all proteins that bind atp , the nucleotide binding domains of the abcfamily of proteins contain characteristic motifs called walker aand b. the walker amotif contains a lysine residue that is critical for activating the katpchannel . when this lysine residue is mutated in nbf1 , but not nbf2 , the katpchannel can no longer be activated . in addition , abc genes also contain a signature c motif . the transmembrane domains contain 611 membrane spanning helices , and the abc c protein contains 6. these helices provide the protein with specificity for the molecule they transport across the membrane . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the abc c8 gene . usually snps linked with disease occur within the coding regions ( exons ) of the genes , and they result in a non-synonymous amino acid change . in abcc8 , there are seven such snps ( at the time of writing ) that cause a switch of amino acids in the mature protein . however , one of the snps of the abc c8 gene that has been linked with diabetes ( r1273 r ) does not cause an amino acid change ( see below ) . abc c8 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on abcc8 and diabetes , search pub med . the two genes that encode the katpchannel , abbc8 and kcnj11 , reside adjacent to one another on chromosome 11. a variant of abcc8 , called a1369 s , is in almost complete linkage disequilibrium with a variant of kcnj11 called e23 k. this means that from the genetic evidence , it is difficult to determine whether it is the a1369 s variant or the e23 k variant that predisposes to type 2 diabetes . a mutation in abc c8 was observed to cause an extremely rare form of diabetes , autosomal dominant diabetes , in a finnish family . the switch of glutamate to lysine at residue 1506 ( e1506 k ) in the sur1 protein caused a 32 genetic landscape of diabetes congenital hyperinsulinemia . the mutation reduced the activity of katp channels , increasing insulin secretion . by early adulthood , the ability of the beta cells to secrete adequate amounts of insulin was exhausted , leading to diabetes . A silent variant in exon 31 of the abc c8 gene has been associated with high concentrations of insulin in non- diabetic mexican americans . the codon agg is mutated to aga , but this still codes for the residue arginine ( r1273 r ) . the normal and mutant alleles were called g and a , respectively . among non-diabetics , those who were homozygous for the mutant allele ( aa genotype ) had higher levels of insulin when fasting , compared with heterozygotes ( ag ) and normal wild-type ( gg ) . because type 2 diabetes is more common in mexican americans than in the general us population , it has been proposed that individuals with the aa genotype are at a higher risk of diabetes because of an over-secretion of insulin . two common polymorphisms of the abcc8 gene ( exon 16-3t/c and exon 18 t/c ) have been variably associated with type 2 diabetes . however , a recent large case control study in britain revealed that these abcc8 variants did not appear to be associated with diabetes . location of abc c8 on the human genome . abc c8 maps to chromosome 11 , approximately between 17,370 and 17,470 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of abc c8 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of abcc8 may fluctuate . the live web site may , therefore , not appear exactly . the calpain 10 enzyme ( capn10 ) summary calpain 10 is a calcium-activated enzyme that breaks down proteins . variation in the non-coding region of the capn10 gene is associated with a threefold increased risk of type 2 diabetes in mexican americans . A genetic variant of capn10 may alter insulin secretion , insulin action , and the production of glucose by the liver . nomenclature official gene name : calpain 10 official gene symbol : capn10 alias : calcium-activated neutral protease genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 35 background the discovery of capn10 marks the first time that screening the entire genome led to the identification of a gene linked to a common and genetically complex disease such as type diabetes . in 1996 , a link was made between a region of chromosome 2 and an increased risk of diabetes in mexican americans in texas , usa . the region on the chromosome , located near the end of the long arm of chromosome 2 , was named niddm1 ( non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 1 ) . to pinpoint a gene that conferred risk , new statistical techniques were used , and the region was sequenced in greater and greater detail . four years later , a new diabetes susceptibility gene , capn10 , was discovered . the new gene encoded the enzyme calpain 10 , a member of the calpain family of cysteine proteases . these enzymes are activated by calcium and regulate the functions of other proteins by cleaving pieces off , leaving the altered protein either more or less active . in this way , they regulate biochemical pathways and are involved in intracellular signaling pathways , cell proliferation , and differentiation . for a detailed description of the action of cysteine proteases , visit stryer 's biochemistry calpains are found in all human cells , and 14 members of the calpain family are now known , many of which are associated with human disease . calpains 1 and 2 are implicated in causing injury to the brain after a stroke and also have been linked to the pathology seen in alzheimer 's disease . calpain 3 is mainly found in the muscle , and mutations cause limb-girdle muscular dystrophy . mutations of calpains in the worm caenorhabditis elegans affect sexual development , and mutations of a calpain-like gene in the fly cause a degeneration of parts of the nervous system . calpain 10 was an unexpected find in the search for a putative diabetes susceptibility gene . its link with diabetes is complex ; susceptibility is not attributable to a single variation but to several variations of dna that interact to either increase , decrease , or have no effect on the risk of developing diabetes . in mexican americans , it is thought that the highest risk combination of these variations results in a population-attributable risk of 14 % , i.e . , 14 % of mexican americans who have diabetes would not have diabetes if they did not have the high-risk genetic variant capn10 . calpain 10 is an atypical member of the calpain family , and its biological role is unknown . because capn10 m rna is expressed in the pancreas , muscle , and liver , its role in diabetes may involve insulin secretion , insulin action , and the production of glucose by the liver . molecular information calpains are found in all human cells and are found throughout the animal kingdom . a blast search using human capn10 as a query finds proteins in 18 different species , all of which are multicellular organisms ( metazoans ) . however , potential true homologous genes have been identified only in the mouse . the calpains consist of a large catalytic subunit and a small regulatory subunit . the large subunit contains four domains ( iiv ) , and the catalytic center of the cysteine protease is located in domain ii . domain I is the n- terminal domain that is processed when the enzyme is activated , domain iii is a linker domain , and the c- terminal domain iv binds calcium and resembles the calcium-binding protein , calmodulin . domain iv also has characteristic ef-hand motifs . calpain 10 is an atypical calpain in that it lacks the calmodulin-like domain iv and instead has a divergent c- terminal domain , domain t. calpains 5 and 6 also have a domain t , and together they form a subfamily of calpains . the capn10 has 13 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 30,000 bases . alternate splicing of the gene creates at least eight transcripts ( named isoform a through isoform h ) , which in turn encode proteins ranging from 138 to 672 amino acids in length . calpain isoform a is the most abundant iso form . it lacks exons 8 , 14 , and 15 but remains the longest transcript and encodes a protein of 672 amino acids that is found in all tissues , with the highest levels being found in the heart . although the structure of capn10 has not yet been solved , mapping the capn10 sequence to the crystal structure of human m-caplain ( also known as calpain 2 or capn2 ) gives a good estimate of structure . the domains span from residues 1672. many single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the capn10 gene . a surprise finding was that the snps linked with type 2 diabetes in the mexican americans were located in the non-coding regions ( introns ) of the gene . usually , snps linked with disease occur within the coding regions ( exons ) of the genes , and they result in a non-synonymous amino acid change . in calpain isoform a , there are four such snps ( at the time of writing ) that cause a switch of amino acids in the mature protein . however , the snps of the capn10 gene that have been linked with diabetes are located in introns ( introns 3 , 6 , and 19 ) , and because introns are not transcribed , they do not directly cause an amino acid change . instead , it is proposed that snps in capn10 introns may alter risk by affecting the transciptional regulation of calpain 10. over 10 % of mexican americans are affected by type 2 diabetes . by studying generations of mexican americans in star county , texas , it was found that snps in introns of the calpain 10 gene were associated with an increased susceptibility to diabetes . intron 3 of the capn10 gene contained snp-43 ( also called ucsnp-43 for university of chicago snp-43 ) in which adenine had been switched to guanine . the high-risk genotype is snp-43 g/g . snps were also found in intron 6 ( snp-19 ) and intron 13 ( snp-63 ) . together , these three snps interact to affect the risk of diabetes . with two different versions of the gene at three distinct sites , there are eight possible combinations , but only four combinations of alleles are commonly found . at each snpsite , the allele was labeled `` 1 `` and `` 2 `` . the most common combination in mexican americans was 112 on one chromosome and 121 on the other . this 112/121 combination was associated with a three-fold increased risk of diabetes . the high-risk combination also increased the risk of developing diabetes in northern europeans , but because the at-risk genotype is less common , it has less of a role in determining susceptibility in europeans . the genotype 112/111 had no effect on the risk of developing diabetes , and the 112/221 combination actually decreased the risk . similar to the mexican americans , the pima indians of arizona have a high prevalence of type 2 diabetes . however , in a study among the pima indians , no association was found between the high-risk genotype snp-43 g/gand an increased prevalence of diabetes , although g/gindividuals did have reduced expression of capn10 m rnaand showed signs of insulin resistance , which may increase susceptibility to diabetes . in europe , capn10 appears to contribute less to type 2 diabetes . in britain , there was no association between snp-43 , snp-19 , and snp-63 and diabetes , but it is possible that snps at other sites in the calpain gene may increase the type 2 diabetes risk . in a large study in scandinavians , no association was found between these three snps and diabetes . in asia , genetic variation in capn10 did not contribute to diabetes in japan or in the samoans of polynesia , although variations of capn10 may play a role in the risk of diabetes in the Chinese . the biological function of calpain has remained unknown for several years ; however , a recent study suggests that calpain 10 may have a critical role in beta cell survival . there are several intracellular stores of calcium ; one of these stores contains calcium channels that are sensitive to ryanodine ( ry r2 ) . in the beta cell , blocking ry r2 initiates a newly discovered pathway that activates capn10 and triggers cell death . link roundup for capn10 live searches diabetes and capn10 in pub med pub med central books background information calpain 10 in omimmolecular biology calpain 10 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer domains snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure 1. location of capn10 on the human genome . capn10 maps to chromosome 2 , approximately between 241,840 and 241,880 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of capn10 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of capn10 may fluctuate . the live web site may , therefore , not appear exactly . the glucagon receptor ( gcgr ) summary glucagon is a key hormone in the regulation of glucose levels . as such , the gcgr gene which encodes its receptor is a candidate diabetes susceptibility gene . a mutant glucagon receptor has been associated with diabetes . background glucagon , like insulin , is a peptide hormone that is secreted by the pancreas . unlike insulin , glucagon acts to promote the mobilization of fuels , particularly glucose . see figure 1 for a summary of the actions of insulin and glucagon on their three main target tissues , the liver , muscle , and adipose tissue . glucagon acts on the liver to stimulate glucose production , either from the breakdown of glycogen ( glycogenolysis ) or by the fresh production of glucose from the carbon skeletons of amino acids ( glucogenogenesis ) . in addition to raising blood glucose levels , glucagon also stimulates the formation of ketone bodies . glucagon does this by stimulating the release of free fatty acids ( ffas ) from adipose tissue , and when these enter the liver , glucagon directs their metabolic fate . instead of being used to make triglycerides ( a storage form of lipid ) , the ffas are shunted toward beta-oxidation and the formation of ketoacids , which can be used by several organs as an alternative fuel to glucose . the glucagon receptor is a member of the 7-transmembrane receptor ( 7 tm ) family . these receptors have also been called the serpentine receptors because of the way the single polypeptide chain of the receptor `` snakes `` back and forth across the cell membrane . this diverse family of receptors not only responds to hormones such as glucagon but also transmits many other signals including light , smell , and neurotransmitters . read more about 7 tm receptors in stryer 's biochemistry . when glucagon outside of the cell binds to the glucagon receptor , it induces a conformational change in the receptor that can be detected inside the cell . the activated receptor stimulates intracellular c amp production , which in turn stimulates protein kinase a ( pka ) to phosphorylate many target proteins , including two enzymes that lead to the breakdown of glycogen and inhibit further glycogen synthesis . molecular information the gcgr gene maps to chromosome 17. it has 14 exons ( coding regions ) that span around 10,700 bases . the 7 tm receptor encoded by this gene is also known as a g protein coupled 40 genetic landscape of diabetes receptor because a g protein ( guanyl nucleotide-binding protein ) conveys an intermediate step in signal transduction . in the unactivated state , the g protein coupled to the glucagon receptor exists as a heterotrimer consisting of , , and subunits . the subunit ( g ) binds gdp . many different g proteins exist , and for the glucagon receptor , because the activated g subunit stimulates adenylate cyclase , the receptor is classified as a gs receptor ( `` s `` for stimulatory effect of the subunit ) . binding of glucagon initiates the exchange of gs-bound gdp for gtp . the g protein then dissociates into gand a gdimer ; the latter transmits the signal that the receptor has bound its ligand . a single glucagon receptor can activate many g proteins , leading to a greatly amplified signal . the signal from an occupied glucagon receptor is `` switched off `` when the g hydrolyzes the bound gtp back to gdp , and the gdp-bound g can now reassociate with g to reform the heterotrimeric protein . A blast search using human gcgr as a query finds proteins in different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular organisms ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and fruit fly . Gcgr and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on gcgr and diabetes . the enzyme glucokinase ( gck ) summary glucokinase , encoded by the gckgene speeds up glucose metabolism and acts as a `` glucose sensor `` in the beta cell . mutant glucokinase causes a rare form of diabetes and may also play a role in type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : glucokinase official gene symbol : gckalias : gk , hexokinase iv , hk4 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 2 , mody2 background the enzyme glucokinase catalyzes glucose metabolism in the liver and in the pancreatic beta cell . glucokinase traps glucose inside the cell by catalyzing its phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this is the first and rate-limiting step in glycosis , a pathway that produces energy in the form of atp from glucose . glucokinase ( also called hexokinase iv ) differs from the other hexokinases that are found in other tissues . first , glucokinase has a lower affinity for glucose . this allows other organs such as the brain and muscles to have first call on glucose when their supply is limited . A second feature is that glucokinase is not inhibited by its product , glucose-6-phosphate . this lack of negative feedback inhibition enables hepatic glucokinase to remain active 42 genetic landscape of diabetes while glucose is abundant , ensuring that the liver can continue removing glucose from the blood ensuring that no glucose goes to waste . glucokinase is proposed to be an important `` glucose sensor `` in the following way . the rate of glucose metabolism is determined by the rate of glucose phosphorylation , which is catalyzed by glucokinase in the liver and pancreas . the liver and pancreas also express glucose transporter ( glut2 ) , an insulin-independent cellular protein that mediates the transport of glucose into cells . the capacity of glut2 to transport glucose is very high , facilitating rapid equilibrium between extracellular and intracellular glucose . thus , in effect , the extracellular glucose concentrations are sensed by glucokinase . by catalyzing the rate-limiting step of glucose metabolism in the liver , glucokinase enables the liver to buffer the rise in glucose that takes place after a meal . in the pancreas , glucokinase is the glucose sensor for insulin release . the threshold for glucose-stimulated insulin release is about 5 mmol/l . mutations of gck that alter this threshold manifest as three different syndromes and highlight the importance of gck in glucose homeostasis and diabetes : 1.activating mutations lower the beta cell threshold for insulin release to as low as 1.5 mmol/l of glucose , leading to an increase in insulin release . this manifests as persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) . 2.inactivating mutations raise the beta cell threshold for insulin release . if two alleles altered by inactivating mutations are inherited , the level of glucose needed to stimulate insulin release from the pancreas is extremely high . affected individuals present with diabetes at birth ( permanent neonatal diabetes ) . 3.maturity onset diabetes in the young , type 2 ( mody2 ) is caused by inheriting one allele that has been altered by an inactivating mutation . this partial inactivation leads to an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin release to about 7 mmol/l . this causes a mild hyperglycemia that is present at birth but often is only detected in later life . because of its role as a glucose sensor , gck is a candidate susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes . molecular information the hexokinase family consists of several enzymes that are all evolutionarily related . in vertebrates , there are four hexokinases named ito iv . glucokinase is a distinct member of this family . a blast search using human gck as a query finds proteins in 46 different species , which range from metazoa ( multicellular organisms ) , fungi , plants , and other eukaryotes . potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse , rat , fly , mosquito , nematode worm , and the plant , mouse-ear cress . the gck gene maps to chromosome 7. it has 12 exons ( coding regions ) that span around 46,000 bases . there are three gck transcript variants that differ in their first exon , and their expression is tissue specific . one isoform predominates in the pancreatic beta cells ; the other two isoforms are found in the liver . the glucokinase enzyme is found in the outer membrane compartment of mitochondria in these tissues . these mutations are all clustered in one area of the glucokinase structure that is remote from the substrate binding site , and this region has been termed the allosteric activator site . because naturally occurring mutations at this site are associated with an increase in insulin release , the search began for pharmacological allosteric activators that could increase gck activity , increase the release of insulin , and be used in the treatment of diabetes . the metabolic changes that take place in type diabetes include impaired insulin secretion from the pancreas and increased glucose production by the liver . in turn , studies of gluckokinase activators ( gkas ) appear to show a dual mechanism of action : they increase the release of insulin from the pancreas and stimulate the use of glucose in the liver , thus making gkas ideal candidates for diabetes therapy . the glucose transporter glut2 summary the glut2 gene encodes a glucose transporter which regulates the entry of glucose into pancreatic beta cells and is thought to be a `` glucose sensor `` . mutations of glut2 cause a rare genetic syndrome that disrupts blood glucose regulation . common variants of glut2 may be linked with type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : solute carrier family 2 ( facilitated glucose transporter ) , member 2 official gene symbol : slc2 a2 alias : glucose transporter 2 , glut2 background the family of glucose transporter proteins transports glucose across plasma membranes . the proteins are facilitative transporters carrying glucose across membranes without requiring energy . each member of the family has its own specialized function and tissue distribution . for a summary of the family of glucose transporters , named glut1 to glut5 , read stryer 's biochemistry . beta cells in the pancreas express glut2 . the transporter has a low affinity for glucose , requiring a high concentration of glucose to achieve half its maximal rate of transport ( high km ) . this enables the beta cell to only begin the insulin secretion cascade during times of plenty . by regulating the entry of glucose into the beta cell , it has been proposed that glut2 is an important `` glucose sensor `` . glut2 is also found in the liver and transports glucose both into and out of liver cells . it allows the liver to buffer changes in glucose concentration after a meal . glut2 has a high capacity for glucose , so once the glucose levels have risen , the liver can quickly remove large amounts of glucose from the blood into the liver cells . genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 45 mutations in the gene that encodes glut2 , called slc2 a2 , cause an extremely rare genetic syndrome called fanconi-bickel syndrome ( fbs ) ( ) . Fbs was named for the scientists who first described the condition in 1949 , and since then over 100 cases have been observed . affected individuals may exhibit hyperglycemia in the fed state and/or hypoglycemia during fasting . hyperglycemia in fbs may involve inappropriate glucose uptake into the liver and this hyperglycemia could be further enhanced by inappropriate insulin secretion by the pancreas . the rise in liver intracellular glucose may inhibit the breakdown of glycogen , leading to low levels of glucose in the blood and increased levels of glycogen stored in the liver . A transport defect of the kidneys also leads to the loss of glucose in the urine which further worsens the hypoglycemia . whereas mutations of slc2 a2 cause a rare genetic syndrome that disrupts glucose regulation , it is possible that variations of this gene may also be involved in type 2 diabetes , a common form of diabetes . molecular information the glut2 gene maps to chromosome 3. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 31,400 bases . members of the glucose transporter family each consist of a single polypeptide of about 500 residues long . this peptide crosses the membrane several times , and there are typically 12 transmembrane segments . the translocation of glucose across the membrane is thought to involve inward-facing and outward-facing glucose binding sites that are located in transmembrane segments 9 , 10 , and 11 of the glutprotein . mutations of these regions severely impair glucose transport ( 4-6 ) . A highly conservered motif , ( r ) xgrr , is found not only in the facilitative glucose transporters but also in the sugar transport superfamily . mutations that disrupt this conserved sequence result in the fanconi-bickel syndrome . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the glut2 gene , four ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . one of these variants ( t110 i ) may be associated with type 2 diabetes status , and different variants have been associated with the fanconi-bickel syndrome ( view known allelic variants ) . the problem of fuel transport appears to have been solved early in evolutionary terms . a blast search using human slc2 a2 as a query finds proteins in 55 different species that include sugar transporters in organisms as diverse as bacteria , fungi , plants , and multicellular species ( metazoa ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . slc2 a2 is a likely candidate gene for type 2 diabetes because it is a high km transporter that regulates entry of glucose in the pancreatic beta cell and triggers insulin secretion . in one diabetic patient , a mutation that disrupts a highly conserved valine in the 5th membrane spanning domain of glut2 was found . the valine at position 197 was switched to an isoleucine residue ( v197 i ) . expression of this mutant protein in xenopus oocytes abolished the transporter activity of glut2 , suggesting that defects in glut2 may have a causative role in the development of diabetes . many studies have been unsuccessful in finding evidence of association between snps in the slc2 a2 gene and type 2 diabetes . one snp that may be significant is a threonine to isoleucine switch at residue 110 ( t110 i ) , which occurs in the second membrane spanning domain of glut2 . this snpis present equally in 46 genetic landscape of diabetes diabetics and non-diabetics , but in one additional study a modest association between the t110 ivariant and type 2 diabetes was observed . the functional role of this polymorphism remains unclear as the variant protein appears to have similar levels of expression and does not seem to disrupt glucose transporter activity . the hnf4 a gene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas . because hnf4 a maps to a region of chromosome 20 that is linked with type 2 diabetes and because mutations of this gene cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes , the hnf4 a gene is considered to be a strong candidate for involvement in type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha official gene symbol : hnf4 a alias : transcription factor 14 , tcf14 background the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver is regulated by the transcription factor hnf4 a ( hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha ) . many functions that the liver carries out may appear and disappear , depending on 48 genetic landscape of diabetes whether hnf4 ais expressed . in addition , hnf4 a controls the expression of another transcription factor ; hepatocyte nuclear factor ( hnf1 a ) , which in turn regulates the expression of several important genes in the liver . as the name suggests , hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 is found in abundance in the liver , but it is also found in the beta cells of the pancreas , the kidneys , and intestines . together with other transcription factors such as hnf1 a and hnf1 b ( encoded by tcf1 and tcf2 , respectively ) , they make up part of a network of transcription factors that function together to control gene expression in the developing embryo . in particular , hnf4 a is thought to play an important role in the development of the liver , kidney , and intestines . in pancreatic beta cells , this network of transcription factors regulates the expression of the insulin gene . in addition , hnf4 and hnf1 regulate the expression of several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g . , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport and glucose metabolism . mutations of hnf4 a can cause an extremely rare form of diabetes , maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) . whereas type 2 diabetes is a disorder usually of late onset with significant genetic basis , mody by definition occurs in the young ( onset at age less than 25 years ) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion . patients with mody caused by hnf4 a mutations exhibit a normal response to insulin ( they are not insulin resistant ) but do show an impaired response to secreting insulin in the presence of glucose . over time , the amount of insulin secreted decreases , leading to diabetes . affected individuals are usually treated with oral hypoglycemic agents , but up to 40 % of patients may require insulin . this form of diabetes is extremely rare and has only been identified in 13 families . the hnf4 a gene is suspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes . because a mutation of this gene causes a rare form of diabetes and because the gene maps to an area of chromosome 20 that has been linked with type 2 diabetes , it is speculated that particular hnf4 a haplotypes may be associated with altered insulin secretion . molecular information hepatocyte nuclear factors ( hnfs ) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation and metabolism . hnf4 ais an orphan receptor ; the ligand ( s ) that binds to this receptor is unknown . a blast search using human hnf4 a as a query finds proteins in 47 different species , which are all multicellular species ( metazoans ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse , rat , and nematode worm . the hnf4 agene maps to chromosome 20. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 30,000 bases . there are at least three different transcript variants of this gene , which encode three different protein isoforms ( a , b , and c ) . the longest m rna transcript , nm000457 , encodes the longest hnf4 a protein ( isoform b ) , containing over 450 amino acids . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the hnf4 agene . at the time of writing , three non-synonymous amino acid changes caused by snps have been observed in the longest protein isoform ( isoform b ) . at present , none of these snps have been associated with either type 2 diabetes or mody ( see known allelic variants ) . however , several snps upstream of the coding region have been associated with both modyand type 2 diabetes . it has been proposed that the pancreatic beta cell is sensitive to the amount of hnf4 a present . a variety of nonsense and missense mutations in hnf4 a cause mody , where a decline in insulin secretion occurs . similarly , snps of the gene may have an impact on the beta cell function , increasing or decreasing insulin secretion . in one british study , a haplotype that was linked with reduced disease risk was identified ( 5 ) . individuals with the `` reduced risk `` haplotype were significantly associated with increased insulin secretion . these individuals also showed a trend toward lower fasting glucose levels and 2-hour plasma glucose levels . this finding led to the speculation that a particular hnf4 a haplotype might be associated with increased insulin secretion capacity and protection against diabetes . genetic variants associated with increased diabetes risk have been identified upstream of the hnf4 a coding region , in a recently discovered alternative promoter called p2 . p2 lies 46 kb upstream of the p1 promoter , and while both promoters are involved in the transcription of hnf4 a , they seem to have different roles in different cells . transcripts from both p1 and p2 have been found in the pancreas , but the p2 promoter is thought to be the primary transcription site in the beta cells and a mutation of p2 is a cause of mody . in the search for genetic variation near the hnf4 a gene , two studies , one of the ashkenazi jew population , and the other of the finnish population ( 8 ) , identified four snps that were associated with type 2 diabetes . these snps ( named rs4810424 , rs1884613 , rs1884614 , and rs2144908 ) flanked the p2 promoter and were associated figure 1. location of hnf4 aon the human genome . hnf4 a maps to chromosome 20 , approximately between 43,700 and 43,750 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of hnf4 a in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of hnf4 a may fluctuate . therefore , the live web site may not appear exactly as in this figure.50 genetic landscape of diabetes with type diabetes risk in both study populations , and the risk of diabetes attributed to each snp was very similar between the two populations . the mechanism by which snps near and in the hnf4 agene increases the risk of diabetes is not yet known . perhaps because many hnf transcription factors can bind directly to the p2 promoter , any alteration of the binding sites for these factors could disrupt the regulation of hnf4 a expression . whereas both p1 and p2 promoters are used in liver cells , mainly p2 is used in pancreas cells , leading to snps affecting the p2 promoter disproportionately affecting hnf4 a expression in the pancreas , in turn leading to beta cell malfunction and diabetes . the insulin hormone ( ins ) summary the ins gene encodes the precursor to the hormone insulin . genetic variations of the insulin gene ( variable number tandem repeats and snps ) may play a role in susceptibility to type 1 and type 2 diabetes . background insulin is a hormone that has a wide range of effects on metabolism . its overall action is to encourage the body to store energy rather than use it , e.g . , insulin favors the storage of glucose as glycogen or fat as opposed to breaking down glucose to release atp . for a summary of the actions of insulin , see the physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation . insulin is composed of two distinct polypeptide chains , chain a and chain b , which are linked by disulfide bonds . many proteins that contain subunits , such as hemoglobin , are the products of several genes . however , insulin is the product of one gene , ins.52 genetic landscape of diabetes ins actually encodes an inactive precursor called preproinsulin . preproinsulin is processed into proinsulin by removal of a signaling peptide ; however , proinsulin is also inactive . the final processing step involves removal of a c-peptide ( a connecting peptide that links chain a to chain b ) , and this process produces the mature and active form of insulin . for further information , see the story of insulin . molecular information several species , including the rat , mouse , and some species of fish , have two insulin genes . in contrast , in humans there is a single insulin gene that is located on chromosome . it has three exons ( coding regions ) that span about 2,200 bases . exon 2 encodes the b chain , along with the signal peptide and part of the c-peptide found in the insulin precursors . exon 3 encodes the a chain and the remainder of the c-peptide . c-peptide is secreted in equal amounts to insulin , but it has long been thought that it has no biological role . however , in diabetic rats c-peptide has been shown to reduce the dysfunction of blood vessels and the nervous system that is common in diabetes . c-peptide contains the greatest variation among species , whereas regions of insulin that bind to the insulin receptor are highly conserved . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the ins gene , none ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein ( see the allelic variants that are known to be associated with disease ) . a blast search using the human proinsulin precursor as a query finds proteins in 107 different species , which are all metazoans apart from three plants and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . the gene contains a variable number of tandem repeats , and it has been proposed that the number of repeats may have an impact on birth weight and diabetes susceptibility . in one study , a dna variant in the 3 ' untranslated region of the ins gene was associated with type 2 diabetes risk . certain mutations of the insulin gene can result in a rare form of diabetes . one form of mutant insulin , called chicago insulin , has been found in individuals who have diabetes that resembles mody . this form of diabetes is rare ; it is caused by a single gene ( is monogenic ) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion . mutations of insulin affecting the phenylalanine amino acid at position 24 or 25 of the b chain ( b24 or b25 ) are associated with diabetes . in chicago insulin , b25 is mutated to leucine , or b24 is mutated to serine . the phenylalanine at position 24 is highly conserved , and in crystal structures of insulin , the aromatic ring of this amino acid is important in anchoring the region of the insulin that binds to the insulin receptor . point mutations of ins can also result in increased levels of proinsulin ( proinsulinemia ) . a switch from arginine to histidine at amino acid position 65 results in proinsulinemia , when it is probable that the mutation of arginine 65 disrupts the site at which the c-peptide is cleaved by beta cell proteases to produce insulin from proinsulin . this mutation does not appear to impair glucose tolerance in heterozygous carriers . other point mutations of arginine 65 have been found in individuals with type 2 diabetes and a raised level of insulin and/or proinsulin . however , one of the individuals had a arg65 pro mutation that was not genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 53 thought to be linked to their diabetes , because the mutation was present in a non-diabetic daughter and absent in a daughter who had had gestational diabete . location of ins on the human genome . ins maps to chromosome 11 , approximately between 2,144 and 2,148 kilobases ( kb ) . the insulin receptor ( insr ) summary the insr gene encodes the receptor for insulin . mutations of the insulin receptor can cause rare forms of diabetes and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . background some receptors found on the surfaces of cells are directly linked to enzymes located inside the cell . the insulin receptor belongs to the largest family of such enzyme-linked receptors , known as the receptor protein-tyrosine kinase ( rtk ) family . more than 50 rtks have been identified , and they share a common structure : an n-terminal extracellular domain containing a ligand-binding site , a single transmembrane helix , and a c-terminal cytosolic domain with protein-tyrosine kinase activity . receptor tyrosine kinases in molecular cell biology most of the rtks consist of single polypeptides , and in response to ligand binding , they dimerize . an exception is the insulin receptor that exists as a dimer in the absence of its ligand . after the ligand has bound to and activated its receptor , the tyrosine kinase activity of the cystolic domain of the rtk is activated . each kinase genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 55 phosphorylates specific tyrosine residues in the cytosolic domain of its dimer partner , a process termed autophosphorylation . autophosphorylation occurs in two stages . first , tyrosine residues near the catalytic site are phosphorylated . in the insulin receptor , this results in a conformational change that permits atp binding , and it may also increase the receptor protein kinase activity . the receptor kinase then phosphorylates other tyrosine residues outside the catalytic domain , creating phosphotyrosine residues that serve as docking ports for additional proteins that transmit intracellular signals downstream of the activated receptors . read more on the signal pathways initiated by insulin binding in molecular cell biology one important docking protein in the insulin receptor is irs1 ( insulin receptor substrate ) . irs1 binds to the phosphotyrosine residues in activated receptors via its src homology 2 ( sh2 ) domains . binding of insulin to its receptor can initiate two distinct signaling pathways : one that includes ras , and one that does not . the initiation of both pathways appears to involve irs1 . molecular information the insulin receptor is a dimer , consisting of two polypeptide chains that are linked by disulfide bonds . each polypeptide contains an alpha subunit ( extracellular ) and a beta sub-unit ( transmembrane and intracellular ) . the alpha and beta subunits are encoded by a single gene , insr , which maps to chromosome 19. it has 23 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 180,000 bases . the insr gene encodes a precursor that starts with an 27-amino acid signal sequence , followed by the receptor alpha subunit , the cleavage site of the processing enzyme , and the receptor beta subunit . depending upon where the insulin receptor is expressed , there are differences in its composition . the alpha subunit found in insr in the liver differs from its form in muscle and adipose tissue in terms of molecular weight , carbohydrate composition , and antigenicity . the level of activity of its tyrosine kinase may also differ , depending on the tissue in which the receptor is expressed . the mechanism underlying receptor heterogeneity is unknown . alternative splicing of exon 11 of the insr gene generates two insulin receptor isoforms , insr type a ( without exon 11 ) and insr type b ( with exon 11 ) . these two transcripts are expressed in a highly regulated fashion and predominate in different tissues . there is evidence that selectivity in the action of insulin may be brought about by the two insr isoforms . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the insr gene , one ( at the time of writing ) of which causes non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . this protein variant has not been associated with observed cases of disease . a blast search using human insr as a query finds proteins in 42 different species , which are all metazoans apart from two viruses . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and mosquito . Insr and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on insr and diabetes , search pub med . mutations in insr lead to a variety of rare clinical syndromes ranging in severity from leprechaunism ( usually fatal within the first 2 years of life ) , rabson-mendenhall syndrome ( survival into the second decade ) , and type ainsulin resistance ( survival into middle age and beyond ) .56 genetic landscape of diabetes resistance to insulin is one of the characteristics of type diabetes . however , most diabetics have a normal sequence of the insulin receptor , indicating that if insulin receptor mutations contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes , they will be present only in a minor fraction of the diabetic population . several variants of the insulin receptor have been associated with hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes . a heterozygous mutation changing val-985 into methionine has been found to be more common in type 2 diabetics than in controls ; the relative risk for diabetes was over 4 % for met-985 carriers . the prevalence of the mutation increased with increasing serum glucose levels , suggesting a role for this receptor variant in hyperglycemia . potassium channels in the beta cells of the pancreas triggers the release of insulin . drugs that close the channel are used in the treatment of diabetes . variation of the kcnj11 gene which encodes this channel has been linked to both increased and decreased insulin release . nomenclature official gene name : potassium inwardly-rectifying channel , subfamily j , member official gene symbol : kcnj11 alias : inwardly rectifying potassium channel , kir6.2 ; beta-cell inward rectifie r subunit , bir ; atp-sensitive inward rectifier potassium channel 11 , ikatp background similar to all cells , pancreatic beta cells maintain a concentration gradient of electolytes ( e.g . , potassium , sodium , and calcium ) across their membranes . ion pumps create the gradient by pushing sodium ( na+ ) out of cells and potassium ( k+ ) into cells . this produces a membrane polarity ; the inner side of the membrane has a negative charge of around -70 m v. to maintain the membrane potential and to be able to alter it , specific proteins called ion channels span the membrane and regulate the passage of ions . the release of insulin is controlled by ion channels that conduct k+ and are sensitive to atp ( katpchannels ) . arise in glucose and the corresponding rise in atp shuts the katp channels , which increases the membrane potential to -40 m v. this state , known as depolarization , opens calcium channels , and the entry of ca2+ into the cell triggers the secretion of insulin . drugs ( e.g . , sulfonylureas ) that close beta cell katpchannels are used to treat type 2 diabetes . they are referred to as `` oral hypoglycemic agents `` because they are taken by mouth and stimulate the release of insulin , which lowers blood sugar levels . the katp channel consists of two types of sub-unit : a k+-channel subunit ( termed kir6.2 ) , and a sulfonylurea receptor subunit ( sur ) , which is a member of the family of atp-binding cassette ( abc ) transporter proteins . the potassium channel is made from four kir6.2 subunits and four sursubunits . the kir6.2 subunit is encoded by the kcnj11 gene . the four kir6 . 2 subunits form the pore of the channel through which k+ passes and also contains the atp-binding sites . the abcc8 gene encodes the sursubunit . the four sursubunits modulate the activity of the channel and contain the binding site of the sulfonylurea drugs . mutations in either kcnj11 or abbc8 can reduce katpchannel activity , leading to increased insulin release and low blood sugar levels , a rare disorder called persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) . in contrast , mice that have targeted overactivity of the katp channel have severe diabetes , and in humans , activating mutations of kcnj11 cause permanent neonatal diabetes . molecular information the kcnj11 gene maps to chromosome 11. it has only one exon ( coding region ) that spans about 2000 bases ( 2 kilobases , or 2 kb ) and does not contain introns ( non-coding regions ) ( see evidence ) . the gene encodes a protein of 390 amino acids and two transmembrane segments . genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 59 each kir6 . subunit is associated with a much larger sursubunit and also contains a binding site for atp . the binding of one molecule of atp causes a conformational change in the channel protein that closes the channel . a blast search using human kcnj11 as a query finds proteins in 30 different species , which are all metazoans . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and nematode . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the kcnj11 gene , four ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . at least two of these , rs5219 which encodes the e23 k polymorphism and rs5215 which encodes the i337 v polymorphism , have been associated with impaired insulin response and increased risk of type 2 diabetes ( see below ) . figure 1. insulin secretion . 1. glucose is transported into the beta cell by type 2 glucose transporters ( glut2 ) . once inside , the first step in glucose metabolism is the phosphorylation of glucose to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this step is catalyzed by hexokinase ; it is the rate-limiting step in glycolysis , and it effectively traps glucose inside the cell . 2. as glucose metabolism proceeds , atp is produced in the mitochondria . 3. the increase in the atp : adp ratio closes atp-gated potassium channels in the beta cell membrane . positively charged potassium ions ( k+ ) are now prevented from leaving the beta cell . 4. the rise in positive charge inside the beta cell causes depolarization . 5. voltage-gated calcium channels open , allowing calcium ions ( ca2+ ) to flood into the cell . 6. the increase in intracellular calcium concentration triggers the secretion of insulin via exocytosis.60 genetic landscape of diabetes kcnj11 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on kcnj11 and diabetes , search pub med . three common snps ( e23 k , l270 v , and i337 v ) have been found in the kcnj11 gene in caucasians ( -13 ) . the e23 kvariant is caused by a switch of guanine to adenine , resulting in a glutamic acid ( e ) to lysine ( k ) substitution at codon 23. analysis of the e23 k variant in various caucasian populations shows that kkhomozygosity has a stronger association with diabetes compared with heterozygous ekor the wild-type ee . however , this risk has not been observed in other caucasian populations . to investigate the effect of e23 k , l270 v , and i337 von the functioning of the katpchannel , human potassium channels containing these snps were made . only one variant , e23 k , altered channel function ; it made the channel less sensitive to atp . therefore , the e23 kchannels were more excitable ; they needed greater amounts of atp before they closed and so were more likely to remain open . because the release of insulin is inhibited when the katp channel is open , e23 k is thought to contribute to the development of diabetes by impairing insulin release ( 14-16 ) . the two genes that encode the katpchannel , abbc8 and kcnj11 , reside adjacent to one another on chromosome 11 . A variant of abcc8 , called a1369 s , is in almost complete linkage disequilibrium with the e23 k variant of kcnj11 . this means that from the genetic evidence , it is difficult to determine whether it is the a1369 s variant or the e23 k variant that predisposes to type 2 diabetes . individuals who are obese or have type diabetes , a chronic elevation of free fatty acids is seen . this leads to the accumulation of long-chain acyl-co as in pancreatic beta cells that stimulate k atp channels and inhibit insulin release . the diabetogenic effect of possessing both the e23 k and i337 v variants may involve an enhanced stimulatory effect of long-chain acyl-co as in polymorphic k atp channels . the theory that variations in the kcnj11 gene may inhibit insulin secretion is supported by a study of adults who did not have diabetes but did have the e23 ksnp . it was found that e23 kwas associated with a impaired insulin release in response to glucose and also an increased body mass index ( bmi ) ( 19 ) . link roundup for kcnj11 live searches diabetes and kcnj11 in pub med pub med central books background information omimmolecular biology kcnj11 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure 3 . Snp positions of kcnj11 mapped to the 3d structure of inward rectifier potassium channel 1. the figure shows the positions of some of the non-synonymous amino acid changes ( green residues ) caused by snps in the coding sequence . the enzyme lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) summary lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) is an enzyme that breaks down triglycerides . Lpl is functionally impaired or present at low levels in many type 2 diabetics . some evidence suggests that insulin plays a role in regulating lpl synthesis . background cholesterol and triglycerides circulate in the blood as a complex with proteins , called lipoproteins . there are several different types of lipoprotein : high-density lipoprotein ( hdl ) , intermediate-density lipoprotein ( idl ) , low-density lipoprotein ( ldl ) , and very low-density lipoprotein ( vldl ) . Vldl and ldlare sometimes referred to as bad cholesterol because they deposit cholesterol in arteries , which over time contributes to the lipid core of atherosclerotic plaques . ldlmakes up 6070 % of the total cholesterol in blood , whereas vldl makes up 1015 % . Idl is an intermediate between vldl and ldl . it is richer in cholesterol than vldl and in clinical tests gets collected with the ldl fraction . hdl , sometimes referred to as good cholesterol , makes up about 30 % of blood cholesterol . the level of hdlis inversely correlated with the risk of coronary heart disease , and it seems to play a protective role . Hdl might carry cholesterol away from the arteries to the liver , where it is broken down . for more information about blood cholesterol levels , visit the national heart , blood , and lung institute . the breakdown and reformation of lipoproteins are interlinked via several steps that often require the action of enzymes , one of which is lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) . it is found in heart , muscle , and adipose tissue , where it breaks down triglycerides in vldl and chylomicrons by hydrolysis into idl ( intermediate-density lipoprotein ) , fatty acids , and glycerol . although the fatty acids can be used as fuel , the idl , which is richer in cholesterol than vldl , is taken up by the liver or is formed into ldl ( low-density lipoprotein ) . Lpl activity also indirectly raises hdl levels because lpl-mediated hydrolysis of vldl provides surface components that merge with hdl3 to form hdl2 particles . for a detailed description of lipoprotein interconversions , visit the university of manitoba . as well as the well-established role of lpl in lipid metabolism , it can also bind specific cell-surface proteins , often via heparan sulfate proteoglycans attached to epithelial cells . this action is independent of any catalytic activity , which means that lpl can `` bridge `` lipoproteins and the surface of cells , leading to an increase in the cellular uptake of lipoproteins . in the blood vessel wall , this action is thought to be proatherogenic . severe mutations in lpl cause a deficiency that results in type ihyperlipoproteinemia , a disorder characterized by high levels of lipoprotein and triglycerides in the blood.64 genetic landscape of diabetes molecular information lipoprotein lipase was so difficult to purify that the protein sequence had to be determined from the nucleotide sequence of its c dna . the lpl gene maps to chromosome . it has 10 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 28,800 bases . the gene encodes a preprotein of 475 amino acids that contains a signal peptide . cleavage of the signal results in a mature protein of 448 amino acids . lipoprotein lipase , along with hepatic lipase and pancreatic lipase , makes up a lipase superfamily ; that is , based on a comparison of the amino acid sequence , all three proteins appear to have evolved from a common ancestor . all lipases , including evolutionarily unrelated prokaryotic lipases , share a serine protease-like catalytic triad of amino acids ( ser-his-asp ) . another class of enzyme , serine proteases , hydrolyzes peptide bonds in many biological settings , for example , within the blood-clotting cascade . the similar catalytic triad seen in the lipase superfamily suggests that a similar mechanism of hydrolysis is used , this time to hydrolyze fats rather than peptides . site-directed mutagenesis experiments on lpl support this hypothesis . although the structure of lplhas not yet been solved , mapping the lpl sequence to the crystal structure of pancreatic lipase gives a good estimate of the structure of lpl . although the enzymatic activity involving the catalytic triad is in the large amino-terminal lipase domain ( residues 1312 ) , the smaller carboxy-terminal domain ( the plat/lh2 domain ; residues 313448 ) binds the lipoprotein substrate . in nature , lpl occurs as a homodimer and , when in this form , binds to cell-surface molecules via several heparin-binding sites , a function that is thought to increase the cellular uptake of lipoproteins . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the lpl gene , seven ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . at least three of these ( rs268 , rs328 , and rs1801177 ) have been associated with observed cases of type ihyperlipoproteinemia ( allelic variants .0033 , .0014 , and .0035 , respectively ) . a blast search using human lpl as a query finds proteins in 38 different species , which are all metazoans apart from one bacterium , trichodesmium erythraeum , an oceanic nitrogen producer . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . a common complication of type 2 diabetes is microalbuminuria , that is , protein being excreted in the urine because of kidney damage through chronic inflammation . in a study of 386 type 2 diabetic patients , a correlation was found between the presence/severity of microalbuminuria and genetic variants of lpl . higher concentrations of ldl constituents have been linked previously to progression of microalbuminuria . furthermore , foam cells ( white blood cells that have `` mopped up `` excess ldl or vldl ) are observed in many chronic inflammatory diseases , including atherosclerosis and kidney disease . these observations point to a possible role for altered lpl in the progression of inflammatory kidney disease , and therefore the microalbuminuria often seen in diabetes type 2 patients . more articles like this another study compared the levels of lpl in the blood of 40 type 2 diabetes patients and a group of healthy individuals prior to heparin injection ( 10 ) . because functional lpl is usually anchored to heparan sulfate proteoglycans on the surface of cells , heparin injection releases the enzyme into the blood . the amount of lpl in the type 2 diabetes patients was significantly lower than that of healthy individuals . however , after a course of insulin , the levels of lpl were increased in the diabetic patients . because this increase can not be attributed to released lpl because no heparin injection was given , it must be caused by the administered insulin . this genetic factors in type 2 diabetes finding supports previous work showing that insulin plays a role in regulating lpl synthesis . more articles like this the h+ allele of the t495 ghind iii polymorphism of lpl is associated with coronary heart disease . this polymorphism was further investigated in 785 chinese subjects , of which about 60 % had been diagnosed with early-onset type 2 diabetes ( < 40 years old ) . within this subset , the polymorphism was associated with higher plasma triglyceride and lower hdl-cholesterol levels . the snps were analyzed as groups inherited together on the same chromosome ( haplotypes ) . one haplotype was associated with insulin sensitivity , another with insulin resistance . insulin resistance is a pathophysiological determinant of type 2 diabetes . of note , these same haplotypes were also associated with coronary artery disease , suggesting that lpl may be a genetic link between diabetes and atherosclerosis . link roundup for lpl live searches diabetes and lpl in pub med pub med central books background information cholesterol levels at the national heart , blood , and lung institute lipoprotein interconversions at the the university of manitoba type ihyperlipoproteinemia in : omimemedicine box continues on next page ... figure 1. location of lplon the human genome . lpl maps to chromosome 8 , approximately between 19,600 and 19,830 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of lpl in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 33 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of lpl may fluctuate . the live web site may , therefore , not appear exactly as in this figure.66 genetic landscape of diabetes box continued from previous page . mechanism of hydrolysis , foam cells on the bookshelf molecular biology lipoprotein lipase in entrez gene evidence . the transcription factor pparg summary an important diabetes risk factor and drug target is peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma ( ppar ) . this protein is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor super-family of transcription factors . Ppar is a key regulator of fat cell differentiation . drugs that activate ppar increase sensitivity to insulin and lower blood sugar levels in diabetics . variants of ppar influence the risk of developing obesity and type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma official gene symbol : pparg alias : ppar g1 , pparg2 background small can be powerful . some genetic risk factors may increase the risk of developing a particular disease by only a small amount . but when the genetic risk factor is common , its effects can tip the balance toward millions of people developing disease . for type 2 diabetes , one such genetic risk is the gene that encodes ppar68 genetic landscape of diabetes ( peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma ) . variants of this gene are among the first to be identified as causing a broad impact on the risk of developing type diabetes . there are three known subtypes of ppar alpha ( ) , delta ( ) , and gamma ( ) . the latter subtype , ppar , is abundant in adipose tissue and plays a key role in fat cell differentiation . Ppar is also the target of the type 2 diabetes drugs called thiazolidinediones ( tzds ) . found in the nucleus of many cells , ppars are both hormone receptors and transcription factors . ppars therefore have two binding sites , one site for ligands ( such as fatty acids , hormones , and specific diabetic drugs ) and one site for dna . to act as a transcription factor , ppar must first form a complex with another transcription factor called retinoid xreceptor ( rxr ) . when a ligand such as the drug tzd binds to the receptor ppar , it activates the ppar rxr complex . the activated complex binds to the promoter region of specific genes and activates transcription . to date , several genes have been identified as being direct targets for ppar , including lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) , fatty acid transport protein ( fatp ) , and acetyl co a-synthase ( acs ) ( 2 ) . transcription of these genes influences the metabolism of fatty acids . tzds such as rosiglitazone can increase insulin-stimulated glucose disposal by activating the ppar rxr complex primarily in fat cells . in doing so , such drugs improve sensitivity to insulin and lower blood glucose levels in type 2 diabetes patients . molecular information nuclear receptors such as ppar are one of the largest groups of transcription factors known today . the members of this family are conserved functionally and structurally and are expressed in a wide range of multicellular ( metazoan ) species . a blast search using human pparg as a query finds proteins in 48 different species . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . the ppar gene maps to chromosome 3. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span more than 140,000 bases . there are three isoforms that differ at their 5 ends . the isoform type 2 ( ppar2 ) has an additional 84 nucleotides at its 5 end compared with the isoform type 1 and is also much less abundant than isoform 1 , its highest levels being found in adipose tissue and the colon ( 4 ) . the crystal structure of the ligand-binding domain of ppar has been solved and shares many structural features with other nuclear receptors , including a central dna binding domain and a ligand-binding domain ( lbd ) in the c-terminal half of the receptor . the lbd contains 11-13 alpha helices that fold to form a hydrophobic pocket where ligands can bind . the af2 ( activating function-2 ) helix of ppar is found here and interacts with rxr and is thought to aid dimerization and transactivation of the two receptors and also initiates transcription . crystal structures of the heterodimer of ppar and rxrin complex with their ligands ( such as rosglita zone and 9-cis-retinoic acid , respectively ) have also been solved . such structures give us a molecular understanding of how ppar is able to bind a variety of ligands and aid the design of drugs that specifically target the gamma receptor . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the pparg gene , three ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in isoform type 2 of the protein np056953 . at least one of these ( rs1801282 ) has been associated with obesity ( allelic variant .002 ) . Pparg and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on pparg and diabetes , search pub med . genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 69 the variant of the ppar receptor inherited may affect the risk of obesity or developing type diabetes . of particular interest is position 12 of the coding region . most people have the amino acid proline here ; this confers a small risk of developing obesity , about 1.3 % . for the individual , this 1.3 % increase in risk is a small risk , but because 75 % of the population have the proline allele , this translates into a tremendous impact on the number of people developing diabetes . acommon variant of the ppar2 is a single nucleotide polymorphism ( snp ) that has alanine in the place of proline at position 12 ( pro12 ala ) . individuals who inherit this variant have a degree of protection against insulin resistance and obesity . one study screened pima indians of arizona for variations in ppar2 . type 2 diabetes is particularly common among this population . affected individuals are obese and resistant to the insulin they produce in inadequate amounts . several new snps were identified , many in the promoter region of the gene . it is not yet clear which snps are the most important in contributing to diabetes in this and in other populations . link roundup for pparg live searches diabetes and pparg in pub med pub med central books box continues on next page ... figure 1. location of pparg on the human genome . pparg maps to chromosome 3 , approximately between 12,300 and 12,450 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of pparg in the human genome . a variant of this regulatory sub-unit may interfere with the cascade of events that occurs after insulin binds to its receptor . nomenclature official gene name : phosphoinositide -- kinase , regulatory subunit , polypeptide 1 ( p85 alpha ) official gene symbol : pik3 r1 alias : grb1 , p85-alphabackground binding of insulin to its receptor triggers a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions beginning at the receptor itself ( autophosphorylation ) and specific target proteins of the receptor called insulin receptor substrates ( irss ) . the cascade of phosphorylation reactions spreads to various cellular proteins and is finally terminated when the insulin receptor is dephosphorylated . enzymes that catalyze the phosphorylation of proteins are called kinases , and one particular kinase , phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase ( pi3-k ) , is a major pathway for the metabolic effects of insulin . it plays a key role in the stimulation of glucose transport , glycogen synthesis , and fat breakdown . pi3-kis made up of a catalytic subunit and a regulatory subunit . the regulatory subunit is encoded by the p85alpha gene , which generates three protein products of 85 , 55 , and 50 k da . each of the three proteins ( p85alpha , p55alpha , and p50alpha ) are found in different tissues and may have specific roles in various tissues . the p85alpha protein is the most common protein isoform in all tissues . insulin can initiate multiple signaling pathways , and the pi3-kenzyme is important in the `` ras-independent pathway `` . after insulin binding and autophosphorylation of the receptor , irs-1 binds to a phosphorylated tyrosine residue on the receptor . the regulatory subunit of the pi3-kenzyme then binds via its src homology 2 ( sh2 ) domains to the receptor-bound irs-1 . the catalytic subunit phosphorylates specific lipids to produce a second messenger , pip3 ( phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-phosphate ) . pip3 binds to and leads to the activation of protein kinase b , which in turn promotes the metabolic effects of insulin , promoting glucose uptake ( by moving glut4 from intracellular stores to the plasma membrane ) and glycogen synthesis ( by activating glycogen kinase 3 ) . the p85alpha gene is a candidate gene for the development of diabetes because of its role in insulin signaling . the most predominant protein this gene encodes is the p85alpha protein , but the p50alpha and p55alpha proteins may also have an important role . molecular information the pik3 r1 gene maps to chromosome 5. it has 17 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 75,000 bases . alternative splicing of the p85alpha gene results in three transcript variants that encode three different protein isoforms . the longest isoform ( np852664 ) is 744 amino acids long . the regulatory subunit of pi3-kcontains two sh2 domains that bind to specific phosphorylated tyrosine residues present in motifs possessing the sequence yxxmor ymxm . these motifs are present on the insulin 72 genetic landscape of diabetes receptor and in all four of the insulin receptor substrates ( irs- , -2 , -3 , and -4 ) . for full activation of the kinase , both sh2 domains of the regulatory subunit need to bind to the motif present on irs-1 . the resulting conformational change of the regulatory subunit activates the catalytic subunit . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the pik3 r1 gene , and these variants may be involved in the development of diabetes . each of the three protein variants encoded by this gene exhibit two ( at the time of writing ) amino acid changes caused by snps in the coding region of pik3 r1 . a blast search using human pik3 r1 as a query finds proteins in 20 different species , which are all metazoans apart from five proteins found in fungi and one protein found in archaea ( single-cell organisms that are distinct from bacteria ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . amethionine to isoleucine switch at residue 326 ( m326 i ) has been observed in europeans and japanese . this change occurs just six amino acids from the n-terminal sh2 domain and appears to affect glucose homeostasis . in the danish population , the variant was common in both diabetics and healthy subjects , with homozygous carriers being less effective at glucose regulation . in the pima indians , diabetes was less common in homozygous carriers compared with individuals who were heterozygous or wild type . the m326 i variant may lead to a reduced level of protein being expressed ( but this may be offset by an observed increased interaction of the enzyme with irs-1 ) . the enzyme variant may also be less efficient in supporting the development of fat cells and in supporting insulin-stimulated glucose uptake into certain cells . overall , the m326 i variant may only have a minor impact on the signaling events initiated by the insulin . but if combined with gene variants encoding other signaling proteins or acquired alterations in protein levels , this enzyme variant may contribute to a functional impact on insulin signaling and thus contribute to the events that lead to type 2 diabetes . the vast majority of diabetes cases fall into the categories of type 1 , type 2 , and diabetes that occurs during pregnancy ( gestational diabetes ) . however , up to 5 % of cases have other specific causes and include diabetes that results from the mutation of a single gene . genetic defects of beta cell function ( mody and others ) mody maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) is an uncommon cause of diabetes that may be mistaken for type 2 diabetes because treatment of both conditions does not require insulin , at least in the early stages of the disease . however , many differences exist between mody and type 2 diabetes . whereas the nature of the genetic predispostion of type 2 diabetes is unclear with many susceptibility genes being implicated , mody is a monogenic condition ( caused by a mutation of a single gene ) that is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait . the onset of diabetes usually occurs in childhood or adolescence , usually before 25 years of age , although the hyperglycemia is mild in some cases and may be missed , as with type 2 diabetes . when hyperglycemia is detected in children , mody may be misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes . genetic studies have defined a number of subtypes of mody . mutations in the genes encoding hepatic nuclear factor 4 ( hnf4 ) , glucokinase ( gck ) , hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha and 1 beta ( commonly known as hnf1 a and hnf1 b , but official symbols are tcf1 and tcf2 , respectively ) , insulin promoter factor 1 ( ipf-1 ) , and neurod1 are the cause of the six known forms of mody ( mody 1-6 ) . see table 2 for a comparison of the mody-related genes . mody2 is caused by a mutant glucokinase enzyme that fails to accurately sense the circulating concentrations of glucose . all of the remaining mody genes encode transcription factors . hnf4 a , tcf1 , tcf2 , and ipf-1 form crucial links in the cascade of transcription factors that control the appropriate expression of beta cell genes , such as insulin and the glucose transporter glut2 . mutations of these genes may disrupt the development of beta cells in the embryo and result in dysfunctioning beta cells in the adult . however , the precise role of these proteins in adult pancreatic islets is only beginning to be unraveled . mody3 and mody2 are the most common causes of mody but remain relatively uncommon causes of diabetes . table 1. comparison between type 2 diabetes and mody . characteristic type 2 diabetes mody inheritance polygenic monogenic , autosomal dominant age of onset usually > 40 years of age usually < 25 years of age pedigree rarely seen across generations usually seen across generations penetrance variable ( 10-40 % ) 80-90 % obesity usually obese non-obese metabolic syndome1 usually present absent 1 metabolic syndrome : diabetes , insulin resistance , hypertension , and hypertriglyceridemia . comparison of mody-related genes . type of mody1 gene molecular basis mody1 hnf4 a abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion , beta cell mass , or both . mody2 glucokinase reduced phosphorylation of glucose results in a defect in sensitivity of beta cells to glucose and a defect in the storage of glucose as glycogen in the liver . mody3 tcf1 ( hnf1 a ) abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion , beta cell mass , or both . mody4 ipf1 abnormal transcriptional regulation of beta cell development and function . mody5 tcf2 ( hnf1 b ) abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion , beta cell mass , or both . mody6 neuro d1 ( beta2 ) abnormal transcriptional regulation of beta cell development and function . mody , maturity onset diabetes in the young ; hnf4 a , hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 ; tcf1 , transcription factor 1 ; hnf1 a , hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ; ipf1 , insulin promoter factor ; tcf2 , transcription factor 2 ; hnf1 b , hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ; neuro d1 , neurogenic differentiation factor ; beta2 , beta cell e-box transactivator 2. other mutations that cause diabetes by impairing beta cell function mutations in mitochondrial dnaare a rare cause of diabetes . mitochondrial dna is a circular molecule that contains 37 genes that are passed on from the mother to her offspring . paternal transmission of mitochondrial dna is thought not to occur , because after fertilization , the fertilized egg destroys mitochondria derived from the sperm . diabetes and hearing loss are associated with a point mutation of mitochondrial dna . the mutation occurs in the gene that encodes t rnaleucine , leading to the substitution of guanine for adenine ( ag ) at position 3243. the t rnaleu 3243 mutation was originally identified in patients with the melas syndrome ( mitochondrial myopathy , encephalopathy , lactic acidosis , and stroke-like syndrome ) ; however , diabetes is not part of this syndrome , suggesting that this mitochondrial mutation may be expressed as different phenotypes . the hnf4 agene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas . hnf4 ais found in a region of chromosome 20 that is linked with type 2 diabetes , and mutations of this gene cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody1 ) . nomenclature official gene name : hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha official gene symbol : hnf4 a alias : transcription factor 14 , tcf14 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 1 , mody178 genetic landscape of diabetes background the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver is regulated by the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor alpha ( hnf4 a ) . many functions that the liver carries out may appear and disappear , depending on whether hnf4 ais expressed . in addition , hnf4 a controls the expression of another transcription factor , hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ( hnf1 a ) , which in turn regulates the expression of several important genes in the liver , including hnf4 a. as the name suggests , hnf4 ais found in abundance in the liver , but it is also found in the beta cells of the pancreas , kidneys , and intestines . together with other transcription factors such as hnf1 aand hnf1 b ( encoded by tcf1 and tcf2 , respectively ) , they make up part of a network of transcription factors that functions together to control gene expression in the developing embryo . in particular , hnf4 ais thought to play an important role in the development of the liver , kidney , and intestines . in pancreatic beta cells , this network of transcription factors regulates the expression of the insulin gene . in addition , hnf4 and hnf1 regulate the expression of several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g . , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport ( glut2 ) and glucose and mitochondrial metabolism . the hnf4 a gene is suspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes ; inheriting particular hnf4 a variants may alter insulin secretion and predispose toward hyperglycemia . mutations of hnf4 a can cause an extremely rare form of diabetes , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 1 ( mody1 ) . whereas type 2 diabetes is a disorder usually of late onset with significant polygenetic basis , mody by definition occurs in the young ( onset at age less than 25 years ) and is a monogenetic disorder inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion . molecular information hepatocyte nuclear factors ( hnfs ) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation and metabolism . hnf4 ais an orphan receptor ; the ligand ( s ) that binds to this receptor is unknown . a blast search using human hnf4 a as a query finds proteins in 47 different species , which are all multicellular species ( metazoans ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in only three species : the mouse , rat , and the nematode caenorhabditis elegans . the hnf4 agene maps to chromosome 20. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 30,000 bases . there are at least three different transcript variants of this gene , which encode three different protein isoforms . the longest m rna transcript , nm000457 , encodes the longest hnf4 a protein ( isoform b ) , containing over 450 amino acids . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the hnf4 a gene . at the time of writing , three non-synonymous amino acid changes caused by snps have been observed in the longest protein isoform ( isoform b ) . at present , none of these snps have been associated with either type 2 diabetes or mody . mutations in the hnf4 agene resulting in mody1 are rare ; to date , only 13 families worldwide have been identified as having this form of mody . because hnf4 aregulates the expression of hnf1 a ( the cause of mody3 ) , the mechanisms that underly these forms of mody are thought to be similar.other types of diabetes 79 patients with mody1 or mody3 primarily have impaired beta cell function ( shown by a defect in glucose- induced insulin secretion ) , as opposed to a primary defect in insulin activity . patients with these forms of mody present with a mild form of diabetes with a worsening of hyperglycemia over time , leading to up to % of patients requiring insulin . these patients have the full spectrum of complications of diabetes that is seen in type 1 and type 2 diabetes . in addition to its effects on beta cell function , a deficiency of hnf4 a affects the liver . in the developing embryo , hnf4 ais needed for normal liver architecture . in the adult , a deficiency of hnf4 a affects lipid synthesis and is associated with reduced serum levels of triglycerides and lipoproteins . glucokinase , encoded by the gckgene , catalyzes the first step of glucose metabolism in the liver . it may also be an important `` glucose sensor `` in the pancreas . mutant glucokinase causes a rare autosomal dominant form of diabetes ( mody2 ) and may also play a role in type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : glucokinase official gene symbol : gck alias : gk , hexokinase 4 , hk4 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 2 , mody2 background the enzyme glucokinase catalyzes glucose metabolism in the liver and in the pancreatic beta cell . glucokinase traps glucose inside the cell by catalyzing its phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this is the first and rate-limiting step in glycosis , a pathway that produces energy in the form of atp from glucose . glucokinase ( also called hexokinase iv ) differs from the other hexokinases that are found in other tissues . first , glucokinase has a lower affinity for glucose . this allows other organs such as the brain and muscles to have first call on glucose when their supply is limited . A second feature is that glucokinase is not inhibited by its product , glucose-6-phosphate . this lack of negative feedback inhibition enables hepatic glucokinase to remain active while glucose is abundant , ensuring that the liver can continue removing glucose from the blood ensuring that no glucose goes to waste . glucokinase is proposed to be an important `` glucose sensor `` in the following way . the rate of glucose metabolism is determined by the rate of glucose phosphorylation , which is catalyzed by glucokinase in the liver and pancreas . the liver and pancreas also express glucose transporter-2 ( glut2 ) , an insulin-independent cellular protein that mediates the transport of glucose into cells . the capacity of glut2 to transport glucose is very high , facilitating rapid equilibrium between extracellular and intracellular glucose . thus , in effect , the extracellular glucose concentrations are sensed by glucokinase . by catalyzing the rate-limiting step of glucose metabolism in the liver , glucokinase enables the liver to buffer the rise in glucose that takes place after a meal . in the pancreas , glucokinase is the glucose sensor for insulin release . the threshold for glucose-stimulated insulin release is about 5 mmol/l . mutations of gck that alter this threshold manifest as three different syndromes and highlight the importance of gck in glucose homeostasis and diabetes : 1.activating mutations lower the beta cell threshold for insulin release to as low as 1.5 mmol/l of glucose , leading to an increase in insulin release . this manifests as persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) . inactivating mutations raise the beta cell threshold for insulin release . if two alleles altered by inactivating mutations are inherited , the level of glucose needed to stimulate insulin release from the pancreas is extremely high . affected individuals present with diabetes at birth ( permanent neonatal diabetes ) .82 genetic landscape of diabetes .maturity onset diabetes in the young , type 2 ( mody2 ) is caused by inheriting one allele that has been altered by an inactivating mutation . this partial inactivation leads to an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin release to about 7 mmol/l . this causes a mild hyperglycemia that is present at birth but often is only detected in later life . molecular information the hexokinase family consists of several enzymes that are all evolutionarily related . in vertebrates , there are four hexokinases named ito iv . glucokinase is a distinct member of this family with a different kinetic profile . a blast search using human gck as a query finds proteins in 46 different species , which range from metazoa ( multicellular organisms ) , fungi , plants , and other eukaryotes . potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse , rat , fly , mosquito , nematode worm , and the plant `` mouseear cress `` . the gck gene maps to chromosome 7 . it has 12 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 46,000 bases . there are three gck transcript variants that differ in their first exons and their expression is tissue specific . one isoform predominates in the pancreatic beta cells ; the other two isoforms are found in the liver . the glucokinase enzyme is found in the outer membrane compartment of mitochondria in these tissues . gck and mody2 : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on gck and mody2 , search pub med . around 200 mutations have been identifed in the gck gene . no one mutation appears to be a common cause of mody2 , and the mutations are found throughout the gene . although mody is an uncommon cause of diabetes , mody2 is a common form of this disorder , especially in children with mild hyperglycemia and in women with gestational diabetes and a family history of diabetes . mody2 has been described in many different populations . unlike the other forms of diabetes , mody2 causes a hyperglycemia that is both mild and nonprogressive . although present from an early age , hyperglycemia is usually only picked up in adulthood during screening for other conditions and may be misdiagnosed as type 2 diabetes . mody2 can often be treated with diet alone . only 2 % of patients require insulin therapy , and complications of diabetes are rare . the tcf1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas and is important in the development of these and other organs . A mutation of tcf1 causes a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody3 ) . nomenclature official gene name : transcription factor official gene symbol : tcf1 alias : hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha , hnf1 a , hepatic nuclear factor 1 , hnf1 , albumin proximal factor , lfb1 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 3 , mody3 background tcf1 belongs to a network of transcription factors that co-ordinates the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver . in the embryo , this network of nuclear proteins guides the development of the liver and continues to be important in the adult . many functions of the liver appear and disappear , depending on the expression of these transcription factors . although found in highest amounts in the liver , this network of transcription factors is found in other organs , such as the pancreas and kidney . the transcription factor hnf4 a regulates the expression of tcf1 and may also regulate tcf2 . in pancreatic beta cells , hnf4 and tcf1 regulate the expression of the insulin gene along with several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g . , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport ( glut2 ) and glucose metabolism . because tcf2 has been found to be expressed in pancreatic islets , it has been suggested that tcf2 functions with tcf1 to regulate gene expression in beta cells . tcf1 and tcf2 share similar domains ; they have a similar dna binding region and dimerization domain . the tcf2 protein is believed to form heterodimers with tcf1 , and depending on the tcf2 isoform , the result may be to activate or inhibit transcription of target genes . mutations of hnf4 a , tcf1 , and tcf2 each cause a distinct form of maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) . mutations of hnf4 a cause mody1 , mutations of tcf1 cause mody3 , and mutations of tcf2 cause mody5 . molecular information the tcf1 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes . in the early 1980s , important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly . these master control genes lay out the body plan , and if they are mutated , the development of the fly is disrupted . these genes were called homeobox genes after `` homeotic `` , the description for a shift in structual development . homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain ( a homeodomain ) of about 60 amino acids . homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes , several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis . other types of diabetes 85 read more about homeodomains in gilbert 's developmental biology the tcf1 gene maps to chromosome . it has nine exons ( coding regions ) that span about 25,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 631 amino acids in length . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the tcf1 gene , four ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . one of these snps ( rs1169288 ) has been associated with observed cases of mody3 ( allelic variant .0011 ) . a blast search using human tcf1 as a query finds proteins in 31 different species , which are all metazoans apart from two fungi , one plant , and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . tcf1 and mody3 : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on tcf1 and mody3 , search pub med . in many populations , mutations in the tcf1 gene resulting in mody3 are the most common cause of mody . because the expression of tcf1 is regulated by hnf4 a ( the cause of mody1 ) , the mechanisms that underly these forms of mody are thought to be similar . patients with mody1 or mody3 primarily have impaired beta cell function ( shown by a defect in glucose- induced insulin secretion ) , as opposed to a primary defect in insulin activity . patients with these forms of mody present with a mild form of diabetes with a worsening of hyperglycemia over time . up to 40 % of patients require insulin , and the full spectrum of diabetes complications that are seen in type 1 and type 2 diabetes may develop . in animal models , a deficiency of the tcf1 gene causes hyperglycemia because of defective beta cell signaling , leading to defective insulin secretion . the beta cell dysfunction in mody3 may be caused by loss-of- function mechanisms , such as reduced dna binding and impaired transcriptional activation . in addition to its effects on beta cell function , a deficiency of tcf1 affects the kidneys and genital system . patients with tcf1 mutations have decreased renal reabsorption of glucose and excrete glucose in the urine ( glycosuria ) . several of the m rna transcripts encoded by the mutant hnf1 a genes are unstable , suggesting that haploinsufficiency ( deficient amounts of gene product ) of hnf1 ais responsible for the pathogenesis of mody3 . haploinsufficiency for hnf1 a may also cause diabetes that may be misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes but is not caused by an autoimmune attack ( idiopathic type 1 diabetes ) . mody4 : caused by a mutation in transcription factor ipf1 summary insulin promotor factor-1 ( ipf1 ) is responsible for the development of the pancreas in the embryo and is also a key regulator of insulin gene expression . mutations of ipf1 cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody4 ) and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : insulin promoter factor 1 official gene symbol : ipf1 alias : homeodomain transcription factor , islet/duodenum homeobox-1 , idx-1 , somatostatin transcription factor 1 , stf-1 , pancreas duodenum homeobox-1 , pdx-1 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 4 , mody488 genetic landscape of diabetes background in the developing embryo , the pancreas is formed from two buds of the primitive gut that eventually fuse together to form the pancreas gland . the exocrine part of the pancreas consists of cells that produce digestive enzymes , such as proteases and lipases , that are delivered to the gut via pancreatic ducts . the endocrine pancreas is much smaller and mainly consists of three cell types alpha , beta , and delta that produce glucagon , insulin , and somatostatin , respectively . the development of the pancreas has been well studied , and many transcription factors can be used to identify pancreatic cells at different stages of development . insulin promoter factor- ( ipf1 ) is one such transcription factor and is an early pancreatic marker that is also found in adult beta cells . at a slightly later stage in pancreas development , tcf1 is expressed and is also found in adult beta cells . in the embryo , the presence of ipf1 is vital to ensure the correct development of the pancreas . loss of both copies of the gene can cause the pancreas not to form ( pancreas agenesis ) . without ipf1 , the proliferation and differentiation of precursor cells into the endocrine and exocrine parts of the pancreas are blocked . ipf1 continues to be essential for normal pancreatic function in the adult . ipf1 regulates the expression of several pancreatic genes , most notably insulin ( ( ins ) , glucose transporter type 2 ( glut2 ) , glucokinase ( gck ) ) , and somatostatin . loss of one copy of ipf1 has been linked to mody4 and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . the dual role of ipf1 during the development of the pancreas in the embryo and as a regulator of pancreatic genes in the adult underscores the importance of ipf1 in glucose homeostasis . molecular information the ipf1 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes . in the early 1980s , important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly . these master control genes lay out the body plan , and if they are mutated , the development of the fly is disrupted . these genes were called homeobox genes after `` homeotic `` , the description for a shift in structural development . homeobox genes such as ipf1 are important in determining cell fates ; in the embryo , the presence of ipf1 ensures that pancreatic precursor cells develop into their destined mature pancreatic cells . homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain ( a homeodomain ) of about 60 amino acids . homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes , several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis . read more about homeodomains in gilbert 's developmental biology the ipf1 gene maps to chromosome 13. it has two exons ( coding regions ) that span about 6,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 283 amino acids in length . the ipf1 gene sequence is highly conserved throughout evolution . even a species that is distant in evolution from humans , such as the zebrafish , has a homeodomain that shares 95 % homology with animal ipf1 homeodomains . a blast search using human ipf1 as a query finds proteins in 47 different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular organisms ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and the plant arabidopsis thaliana ( the first plant for which the complete genome has been sequenced ) . in fact , the current understanding of mody is based on studies of a single family . in this family , an infant was born with agenesis of the pancreas that resulted in permanent neonatal diabetes and lack of pancreatic digestive enzymes . the infant was found to be homozygous for a deletion mutation in ipf1 that caused a frameshift . the resulting truncated protein did not contain the homeodomain that is essential for dna binding . family members who were heterozygous for the same mutation had a mild form of diabetes ( now called mody4 ) that was being treated with either diet alone or oral hypoglycemic agents . being heterozygous carriers for the ipf1 mutation was linked with severely impaired insulin secretion . affected family members could be traced back to six generations . compared with other forms of mody , the expression of this form of diabetes may occur at later ages . further investigations into the role of ipf1 in the developing pancreas and in the functioning of the adult pancreas will improve our understanding of how beta cell dysfunction arises and leads to diabetes . the nature of figure 1. location of ipf1 on the human genome . the ipf1 gene maps to chromosome 13 , approximately between 26,285 and 26,300 kilobases ( kb ) . click on the figure or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ipf1 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of ipf1 may fluctuate . therefore , the live web site may not appear exactly as in this figure.90 genetic landscape of diabetes ipf1 is also important when considering how to produce functional beta cells that can be transplanted in the hope that such cells can continue secreting insulin , thus providing a cure for diabetes . mody5 : caused by a mutation in transcription factor tcf2 summary tcf2 encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas and is important in the development of these and other organs . a mutation of tcf2 causes a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody5 ) . nomenclature official gene name : transcription factor 2 official gene symbol : tcf2 alias : hepatic nuclear factor 1 beta , hnf1 b , hepatic nuclear factor 2 , hnf2 , transcription factor , liver-specific ; variant hepatic nuclear factor , vhnf1 , lfb3 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 5 , mody5 other types of diabetes 91 background tcf2 belongs to a network of transcription factors that co-ordinates the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver . in the embryo , this network of nuclear proteins guides the development of the liver and continues to be important in the adult . many functions of the liver appear and disappear , depending on the expression of these transcription factors . although found in highest amounts in the liver , this network of transcription factors is found in other organs , such as the pancreas and kidney . the transcription factor hnf4 a regulates the expression of tcf1 and may also regulate tcf2 . in pancreatic beta cells , hnf4 and tcf1 regulate the expression of the insulin gene along with several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g . , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport and glucose metabolism . because tcf2 has been found to be expressed in pancreatic islets , it has been suggested that tcf2 functions with tcf1 to regulate gene expression in the beta cells . tcf1 and tcf2 share similar domains ; they have a similar dna binding region and dimerization domain . the tcf2 protein is believed to form heterodimers with tcf1 , and depending on the tcf2 isoform , the result may be to activate or inhibit transcription of target genes . mutations of hnf4 a , tcf1 , and tcf2 each cause a distinct form of maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) . mutations of hnf4 a cause mody1 , mutations of tcf1 cause mody3 , and mutations of tcf2 cause mody5 . molecular information the tcf2 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes . in the early 1980s , important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly . these master control genes lay out the body plan , and if they are mutated , the development of the fly is disrupted . these genes were called homeobox genes after `` homeotic `` , the description for a shift in structural development . in the embryo , the presence of tcf2 is needed for the correct development of the kidneys and genital system . homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain ( a homeodomain ) of about 60 amino acids . homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes , several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis . read more about homeodomains in gilbert 's developmental biology the tcf2 gene maps to chromosome 17. it has nine exons ( coding regions ) that span about 60,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 557 amino acids in length . there are at least two transcript variants of tcf2 ; a third variant has been identified in the rat but not yet in man . transcript variant a encodes protein isoform a , which predominates in the liver and stimulates transcription . transcript variant b contains an intron that is spliced out of other variants , and as a result the encoded protein , isoform b , has a distinct cterminus . isoform b appears to be unable to stimulate transcription and instead inhibits the transactivation activity of tcf1 . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the tcf2 gene , two ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . one of these snps ( rs1800575 ) has been associated with observed cases of mody5 ( allelic variant .0001 ) .92 genetic landscape of diabetes a blast search using human tcf2 isoform a as a query finds proteins in different species , which are all metazoans apart from two fungi and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . mutations in tcf2 are associated with mody5 , severe renal defects , and genital malformations . although renal disease is a common complication of diabetes , the renal disease that is associated with tcf2 mutations and mody5 appears to be a direct result of the tcf2 mutation rather than a complication of hyperglycemia . several mutations of tcf2 have been identified , many of which involve a deletion that disrupts the dna binding domain . one such mutation was found in a norwegian family in which a deletion in exon 2 resulted in a protein that lacked amino acids arg-137 to lys-161 . affected members had mild diabetes and non-diabetic renal disease that was worsening ; both are features of mody5 . in addition , two affected female carriers of this mutation had an undeveloped vagina and uterus . this mutant tcf2 protein was unable to bind to tcf1 and could not stimulate transcription of a target gene , indicating that this was a loss-of-function mutation . A deletion mutation of tcf2 that spared the dna binding domain was found to encode a protein with increased transactivation potential , suggesting that this was a gain-of-function mutation . when both types of human mutant tcf2 were overexpressed in the embryo of the developing frog , they both interrupted the proper development of the kidney . this reflects the different types of renal disease that are seen in individuals with different types of tcf2 mutations . these findings imply that tcf2 has a central role in normal kidney development . mody6 : caused by a mutation in transcription factor neurod1 summary the transcription factor neurod1 can directly activate the transcription of the insulin gene . it is also needed in the development of the pancreas beta cells and the nervous system . mutations of this gene cause mody6 , the most recently discovered form of autosomal dominant diabetes , and may also play a role in type 1 and type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : neurogenic differentiation 1 official gene symbol : neurod1 alias : neurod , neuro d , beta2 , bhf-1 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 6 , mody6 background the development and the normal functioning of the endocrine pancreas are dependent on a network of transcription factors . these proteins influence the transcription of genes in a negative or positive way . the neurod1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is a positive regulator for the transcription of the insulin gene . neurod1 ( for `` neurogenic differentiation `` ) is a protein that was first discovered to be important in the development of the embyronic nervous system . the expression of neurod1 stimulates neurons to mature , or differentiate , and it has the potential to convert undifferentiated cells into neurones . in animal models , mutations of the neurod1 gene disrupts the normal development of the pancreas , leading to diabetes . certain structures in the brain , such as the cerebellum and hippocampus , also fail to develop properly , resulting in seizures . the link between neurod1 and diabetes was first suggested when it was discovered that the neurod1 gene is located in the same region of a chromosome that is linked with type 1 diabetes susceptibility . this region is called iddm7 and is found on the short arm of chromosome 2. in addition to the link with type 1 diabetes , variants of neurod1 have also been linked with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes , and a mutation of neurod1 causes the most recently discovered form of autosomal dominant diabetes , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 6 ( mody6 ) . molecular information neurod1 belongs to a group of transcription factors called basic helix-loop-helix ( b hlh ) proteins . the b hlh proteins contain a conserved sequence of amino acids that binds to dna . this sequence is also known as a 96 genetic landscape of diabetes dna-binding motif , and the hlh motif consists of a short alpha helix connected by a flexible loop to a second , longer alpha helix ( see the hlh domain ) . b hlh proteins are classified into two groups based on how they bind to dna and in what tissues they are found . class a members tend to be expressed in all tissues , whereas class b members , such as neurod1 , are found only in specific tissues , mainly in the nervous system and the pancreas . b hlh proteins can function as transcription factors only when two b hlh monomers complex to form a dimer . the two-helix structure of hlh binds both to dna and to the hlh motif of a second hlh protein . the second hlh protein can be the same ( resulting in a homodimer ) or different ( resulting in a heterodimer ) , and alpha helices extending from the dimerization interface make specific contacts with dna . the neurod1 gene maps to chromosome . it has two exons ( coding regions ) that span about 4,860 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 356 amino acids . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the neurod1 gene , three ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature proteins . a blast search using human neurod1 as a query finds proteins in 24 different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and roundworm . neurod1 and mody6 : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on neurod1 and mody6 , search pub med . neurod1 , after its heterodimerization with the hlh protein e37 , regulates transcription of the insulin gene . neurod1 binds to the e-box motif of the insulin gene promoter . it is proposed that deficient binding of neurod1 or binding of transcriptionally inactive neurod1 to target promoters in pancreatic islets leads to the development of diabetes . mutations in neurod1 have been found in three families to date , and these mutations are associated with type 2 diabetes and mody . in one family , a gt substitution in codon 111 caused a switch in amino acids at this position from arginine to leucine ( arg111 leu ) . the arg-111 residue is found in the dna-binding domain of neurod1 and has been evolutionarily conserved from the fruit fly to mammals and is found in all members of the hlh family of transcription factors . in this family , the arg111 leu mutation was associated with type 2 diabetes ; of the six carriers of the mutation , four were diagnosed with diabetes in their mid-40s , and two had impaired glucose tolerance . asecond family had an insertion of a cytosine residue in codon 206 ( 206+c ) , resulting in a frameshift mutation . the truncated protein that was synthesized lacked the c-terminal third of the protein , which includes the transactivation domain . of the nine carriers of the 206+cmutation , seven had diabetes . the nature of the diabetes observed in the second family was different in several ways : the diabetes was diagnosed at an earlier age and was more severe ( 2 of the 206+ccarriers required treatment with insulin ) , and the affected individuals were not obese and had low insulin levels . the early onset and severity of diabetes resemble mody rather than type 2 diabetes . thus , mutations in neurod1 are proposed to be the cause of a new subtype of mody , designated mody6 . type 2 diabetes is thought to result from a combination of environmental , behavioral , and genetic factors , with the heritability of type 2 diabetes estimated to be in the range of 25 % to 72 % based on family and twin studies . since early 2007 , genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) have led to an explosion of data for the genetics of type 2 diabetes and related traits . these gwas have occurred on the back - ground of genotyping arrays populated by common single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) , deployed in various cohorts that have coalesced to form large international consortia . as a result , a list of genetic loci that influence type 2 diabetes and quantitative glycemic traits has begun to accumulate . over 100 type 2 diabetes-associated loci have been identified , in addition to others involved in deter - mining quantitative glycemic traits , such as insulin resistance . however , no variant that is widely shared across populations has been found to have a stronger effect than the rs7903146 snp in tcf7 l2 , which itself has only a modest effect ( odds ratio 1.4 ) . nonetheless , gwasfindings have illustrated novel pathways , pointed toward fundamental biology , drawn attention to the role of beta cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes , confirmed prior epidemiologic observations , and provided possible targets for pharmacotherapy and pharma - cogenetic clinical trials . on the other hand , the causal variants have only been identified for a handful of these loci , a substantial proportion of the heritability of these phenotypes remains unexplained , and this has tempered expectations with regard to their use in clinical prediction . together , the approximately 100 loci associated with type 2 diabetes thus far explain 10 % 15 % of the genetic predisposition to the disease . limitations of early gwas included insufficient sample sizes to detect small effects , a nearly exclusive focus on populations of european descent , an imperfect capture of uncommon genetic variants , an incomplete ascertainment of alternate ( non-snp ) forms of genetic variation , and the lack of exploration of additional genetic models . as the community embraces complementary approaches that include systematic fine-mapping , custom-made replication , denser genotyping arrays , platforms that focus on functional variation , next-generation sequencing techniques , systems biology approaches , and expansion to non-european populations , the coming years will witness exponential growth in the understanding of the genetic architecture of metabolic phenotypes . whether these findings prove useful in disease prediction or therapeutic decision-making must be tested in rigorously designed clinical trials . type2 diabetes as a genetic disease the explosive parallel growth in the prevalence of the related metabolic disorders of obesity and type 2 diabetes in much of the developed and developing worlds over the past few decades is almost certainly driven by environmental and behavioral factors , since genetic components do not change in an appreciable manner over such a short time period . however , several lines of evidence suggest that variation in dna sequence does contribute to type 2 diabetes risk . first , twin studies have shown that concordance for type 2 diabetes is greater for monozygotic twins ( who share 100 % of their dna sequence ) than for dizygotic twins ( who , like siblings , share approximately 50 % of their dna sequence ) . second , the incidence of diabetes is much higher in certain racial/ethnic groups , despite an environment that is relatively comparable to that of neighboring populations . third , family history is an independent risk factor for the development of diabetes in population studies . and fourth , rare familial forms of diabetes , caused by mutations in single genes ( hence , termed monogenic or mendelian ) , prove that single base pair changes in the coding regions of key genes , which lead to alterations in protein sequence and function , are sufficient to cause hyper - glycemia in the diabetic range . consistent with this notion , the heritability of type 2 diabetes estimated in a set of scandinavian families ranges from 25 % to 69 % , and a large international meta-analysis of twin studies has reported a heritability estimate as high as 72 % . diabetes in america , 3rd edition taken together , these observations illustrate that rapid changes in the global epidemiology of type 2 diabetes are likely caused by environmental and behavioral factors overlaid on a background of genetic predisposition . this genetic predisposition may vary across populations , in some measure due to their divergent genetic history and unequal selection pressures in specific geographic regions . thus , it is well known and described else that the risk of type 2 diabetes differs in the various ethnic groups that compose the u.s. population , and the presumption is that some of these differences are genetic in nature . why is genetic exploration relevant ? regardless of whether genetic predictors become useful markers of disease onset or progression in clinical practice , the identification of genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes illuminates pathogenic mechanisms from which therapeutic windows may emerge . because germline genetic variation always predates the onset of disease , the arrow of time establishes a causal relationship that is not evident with other biologic associations . thus , the genetic approach has a unique opportunity to shed light on the pathophysiology of diabetes in its various manifestations , helping unravel its clinical heterogeneity and potentially refine therapeutic strategies . discovery of type2 diabetes genes before the sequencing of the human genome was accomplished , genetic mapping was dependent on the generation of anonymous genetic markers and their anchoring on specific locations in the genome . this task , first achieved with restriction fragment length polymorphisms and then with other markers , such as microsatellites or sequence tag sites , enabled the introduction of whole-genome linkage analysis and positional cloning , which proved extremely useful in the identification of genetic mutations that cause monogenic disease . the linkage approach , which depends on the co-segregation of a causal mutation with the anonymous marker along the lines of inheritance in pedigrees composed of affected and unaffected members , is particularly useful for traits where disease-causing alleles are highly penetrant : that is , the presence of the genetic variant virtually always co-occurs with disease , and its absence co-occurs with absence of the disease . as such , in the diabetes field , linkage analysis facilitated the discovery of the genes that underlie the various types of monogenic diabetes , such as maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) or neonatal diabetes ; these are described in detail in chapter 7 monogenic forms of diabetes . in complex diseases , where the pheno type presumably arises as a combination of several genetic variants and their interaction with the environment , successful linkage analysis is considerably more difficult . though it succeeded in demonstrating the strong influence of the human leukocyte antigen ( hla ) region on type 1 diabetes , by and large , linkage analysis did not yield reproducible positive results for type 2 diabetes . this is because in type 2 diabetes there is not a single genetic locus that exerts a very strong effect in the general population or even in individual family pedigrees . thus , the effect of genetic variation is probabilistic rather than deterministic ; a substantial proportion of people with some risk variants may be disease-free , whereas others who carry protective alleles may instead have type 2 diabetes , due to a constellation of other factors . in such situations , the amount of information provided by meioses within families , on which the power of linkage analysis depends , is greatly reduced , and the number of families required can be inordinately large . to demonstrate the effect of genetic variation on human phenotypes , an alternative approach was needed : association testing , which simply asks whether a specific allele is significantly overrepresented in diabetes cases compared to controls without diabetes , and which , with large sample size , has greater statistical power to detect a common variant of weak effect . its major limitation prior to 2005 was that only a handful of variants could be tested at a time , which required some prior biologic knowledge on the existence of such variants and the role of a given gene in diabetes pathophysiology . the discovery of millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) and their deposition in public databases ; the manufacturing of genotyping arrays that could simultaneously query hundreds of thousands of snps with great precision ; the understanding of an underlying correlation structure between snps , driven by the finite number of recombination events in human history , which reduced the complexity of the variation to be interrogated ; the recognition that the scientific imperative of reproducibility required the acceptance of strict statistical thresholds that accounted for the universe of possible hypotheses in the human genome ; and genetics of type diabetes.loci are arranged alphabetically by chromosome number . one representative variant and one or two genes are provided for each locus . loci are defined as association signals located within 500 kb of each other regardless of linkage disequilibrium . chr , chromosome . discovery of type 2 diabetes association followed detection in genome-wide association studies for quantitative glycemic traits . loci are arranged alphabetically by chromosome number . one representative variant and one or two genes are provided for each locus for each glycemic trait . loci are defined as association signals located within 500 kb of each other regardless of linkage disequilibrium . b , beta cell ( fasting glucose , homa-b , corrected insulin response , disposition index , insulinogenic index , or these traits adjusted for bmi ) ; bmi , body mass index ; chr , chromosome ; fp , fasting proinsulin ; h , hemoglobin a1c ; homa-band homa-ir , beta cell function and insulin resistance by homeostasis model assessment , respectively ; i , insulin resistance ( fasting insulin , 1-hour glucose , 2-hour glucose , homa-ir , or these traits adjusted for bmi ) . locus is also associated with type 2 diabetes . variant of inuit ancestry that is common in the greenlandic population ( frequency 17 % ) and is associated with 2-hour glucose and insulin levels . stop codon homozygotes harbor a tenfold increased risk of type 2 diabetes compared to wildtype allele carriers . definitive identification of the implicated protein allowed for functional studies : the stop codon induces lower protein levels of tbc1 d4 in human skeletal muscle , causing reduced numbers of the glucose transporter glut4 and decreased insulin-stimulated glucose uptake , leading to postprandial hyperglycemia and impaired glucose tolerance . however , many of these gwas only captured common variants , because imputation of ungenotyped variants depended on available reference panels from resources such as the hap map . the introduction of massive parallel sequencing techniques and the concomitant dramatic drop in cost allowed for efficient , high-fidelity sequencing of thousands of samples . this enabled three major developments : first , denser reference panels could be developed for more accurate imputation of less common variants ; second , targeted genotyping arrays that included less common but likely functional variation ( e.g . , coding variants ) could be designed ; and third , the allelic spectrum captured in case-control or quantitative trait studies could be expanded into less common frequencies , so that population genetics by which a rare variant may rise to prominence in a specific ethnic group could be exploited . arrays containing exome content deployed in large populations have identified coding variants in established or novel genes associated with type 2 diabetes or related quantitative traits . by detecting a robust association signal in the coding region of a specific gene ( e.g . , sgsm2 and proinsulin levels ) , these studies serve to advance the candidacy of said gene as the causal locus , from within the various possibilities under a noncoding gwas association peak . beyond genotyping , sequencing of whole exomes in europeans and mexicans has also yielded novel associations , and the extensive genetic and pedigree data available in the icelandic population have allowed whole-genome sequences in 2,630 icelanders to be extrapolated to a sample size of 11,114 type 2 diabetes cases and 267,140 controls for additional discovery . finally , whole-genome sequencing in 2,657 european individuals with and without diabetes and whole- exome sequencing in 12,940 individuals from five ancestry groups have begun to shed light on the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes in a more systematic fashion , in terms of plausible effect sizes , observed allelic frequencies , and the potential number of causal variants . all in all , these studies support a model in which type 2 diabetes is caused by hundreds or thousands of loci of modest effects , with no major role for low-frequency variants of strong effects in disease predisposition . Insights gained the tremendous success of gwas and their follow-up for type 2 diabetes and other human phenotypes have resulted in a number of insights into the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes . although the functional variants at most type 2 diabetes-associated loci are not yet known , most associated loci are located near genes that were previously unsuspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes pathophysiology . this observation highlights the complexity of the disease phenotype and the power of agnostic approaches in unearthing new knowledge . conversely , it brings to the forefront the constraints imposed by prior knowledge on scientific inquiry and points to the inadequacy of prior candidate gene selection efforts , as most logical candidate genes did not yield significant associations . this observation does not necessarily minimize the role of such biologic candidates on glucose homeostasis ; rather , it may indicate natural selections little tolerance for functional variation in those key genes . noncoding variation can affect human phenotypes . the snps with the strongest associations are often found in introns , regulatory regions , or intergenic segments , i.e . , they do not change the amino acid sequence of the encoded proteins . furthermore , for the most part , no obvious missense snp has been identified in coding regions for which the associated snp was a proxy and , thus , might have explained the association signal . the human genome is rife with regulatory sequences that influence the timing , location , and level of expression of genes , and these are thought to have a substantial impact on human biology . most genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes have modest effects . no common variant that is widely shared across populations has been found to have a stronger effect . some are either rare or unique to specific populations . moreover , pioneering whole- exome and whole-genome sequencing experiments in thousands of samples across multiple ethnic groups have failed to unveil a plethora of rare variant associations , and they have not provided support for the hypothesis that common variant association signals are undergirded by rare variants of strong effects thus , the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes appears to involve hundreds of variants with modest effects while rare variants might be found that have stronger effects in specific families or population groups , they are most likely to be private , as shared rare variants of strong effects should have been found by linkage . a corollary of this observation is that any single variant is unlikely to have significant predictive power in the individual , and even when many variants are combined into a genotype risk score ( grs ) , predictive power is poor . together , the approximately 100 loci associated with type 2 diabetes thus far explain 10 % 15 % genetics of type diabetes 147of the familial aggregation of the disease , or 5.7 % of the variance in type 2 diabetes susceptibility . the majority of genetic variants that influence type 2 diabetes risk affect beta cell function . human studies have shown that most of the identified variants ( whether causal or tagging a causal variant ) are associated with impaired beta cell function , directly or indirectly . insulin secretion appears to be more heritable than insulin resistance , confirming the pathogenic hypothesis put forth by early geneticists , by which a mostly environmental insult causing insulin resistance is overlaid on a mostly genetic predisposition to beta cell dysfunction . the genetic architecture of beta cell function and insulin action seem to differ . as mentioned , measures of estimating beta cell function in humans are more amenable to genetic approaches ( i.e . , they have a higher likelihood of yielding significant findings ) than measures of insulin sensitivity . insulin resistance might be influenced by fewer loci , less frequent variants or those with more modest effects , or a stronger environ - mental component . the genes that elevate fasting glucose in normal individuals are not necessarily the same genes that cause type 2 diabetes . while a simple model would predict that any locus that raises fasting glucose should raise risk of type 2 diabetes , the exploration of genetic determinants of glucose homeostasis in nondiabetic individuals has yielded a number of variants that do both ( i.e . , raise fasting glucose and increase type 2 diabetes risk ) , but also a non-trivial number that raise fasting glucose without appreciably increasing risk of type 2 diabetes . this observation has led physiologists to consider not just the magnitude of the glucose increase , but the manner in which this happens , as relevant to the emergence of disease . a simple elevation of the glucose set point , for example , may not necessarily lead to hyperglycemia in the diabetes range , if beta cell function is otherwise intact ; however , an alteration that leads to progressive beta cell deterioration would cause diabetes in the future . genetic studies support prior epidemiologic observations . a gwas for fasting glucose yielded significant associations near two circadian genes ( mtnr1 b and cry2 ) . a growing literature implicates circadian dysregulation , through epidemiologic reports , animal studies , and human perturbation experiments , in metabolically deleterious phenotypes . thus , a gwas for glycemia provides a potential genetic link between the two systems . similarly , a snp in adcy5 has been associated with fasting glucose , type 2 diabetes , and low birth weight , once again corroborating the known relationship between being born small for gestational age and future risk of obesity and diabetes . in addition , snps in fto and mc4 r contribute to obesity , insulin resistance , and type 2 diabetes , thus connecting various components of the metabolic syndrome . most common risk variants are shared across ethnic groups . although gwas of comparable size and power have not yet been performed in non-european populations , when investigators have tried to ascertain whether common variants that influence these traits in people of european descent also do so in individuals of other continental ancestries , by and large , they have found similar effects ; though , some loci do show heterogeneity . once allele frequency differences and altered haplotype structures are taken into account , analogous patterns of association emerge in african american , hispanic , asian , or native american populations . genetic information does not add much beyond clinical variables for type 2 diabetes prediction . commonly ascertained clinical variables are fairly precise at capturing future risk of type 2 diabetes ; thus , adding the set of common variants known to date ( which only explains a minor fraction of the genetic predisposition to type 2 diabetes ) does not seem to improve predictive accuracy at the individual level or the ability to discriminate between risk strata in a clinically meaningful way . prediction is slightly improved in younger individuals , in whom clinical risk factors are not yet fully manifest . loci initially identified in populations of european descent appear to have similar effects in other racial/ethnic groups abquintile of genetic risk score fasting glucose . an intensive lifestyle intervention is effective in people with the highest burden of known risk alleles . the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention , consisting of dietary and physical activity components , is effective even in the quartile of participants who carry the highest load of known risk variants . genetic variation may affect drug response . genetic information may eventually be used to guide medication choices in type 2 diabetes . though this is the standard of care for monogenic diabetes with examples in both mody and neonatal diabetes , the potential of genetically guided therapy is yet to be realized in common type 2 diabetes . a polymorphism in a metformin transporter may affect glycemic response to metformin , and a gwas for metformin response in people with type 2 diabetes has identified a polymorphism near the atm gene that influences metformin response in several independent cohorts , although it does not seem to exert the same effect for diabetes prevention in people with prediabetes . some sulfonylureas are metabolized by the cytochrome p450 enzyme cyp2 c9 , and patients with loss-of-function variants in this gene are at increased risk of sulfonylurea-related hypoglycemia . these early pharmacogenomic lessons suggest that genes relevant to drug response may be the same as those that increase risk for type 2 diabetes , or they may be different . limitations of current approaches ( and their solutions ) despite the overwhelming success of gwas strategies in advancing knowledge of the genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes , a number of limitations must be recognized . these limitations have been identified by the research community and are being addressed to complement gaps in understanding . gwaswere initially undertaken only in populations of european descent . a large swath of genetic variation is unique to other populations , especially those of african descent , due to the bottleneck introduced when a limited subset of human ancestors migrated out of africa . in addition , genetic variants have been identified that , though present in europeans , are much more common in other populations , thereby acquiring greater statistical power to detect modest effects . gwas efforts in east asian south asian , african american , hispanic , and native american cohorts have already yielded novel genome-wide significant findings , many of which are also seen in europeans . as larger consortia and transethnic meta-analyses are undertaken , more novel findings are expected to come to light . gwas of large cohorts suffer from relatively crude phenotyping . because sample size is paramount to achieve adequate statistical power , gwas are typically carried out in very large population cohorts where only limited phenotyping is feasible . the estimates of beta cell function or insulin sensitivity derived from simple measures , such as fasting glucose or insulin ( as opposed to those obtained from more labor-intensive and costly dynamic testing ) , are relatively imprecise . however , some of the participating cohorts do have more sophisticated phenotyping : while the partcipants have contributed their simple traits to the meta-analytic efforts , the investigators are also able to form subconsortia where additional physiologic inquiry can be carried out . this type of analysis has been performed for proinsulin levels adjusted for fasting insulin , various dynamic measures of insulin secretion , and insulin sensitivity derived from clamp studies , and it is underway for insulin sensitivity derived from oral glucose tolerance tests and insulin clearance . gwasonly capture common variants . due to the composition of genotyping arrays and statistical issues around rare observations , most gwas to date have concentrated solely on common variation ( i.e . , minor allele frequency > 5 % ) . the introduction of next-generation dna sequencing technologies has allowed for a downward expansion in the characterization of shared uncommon variation , as sequencing > 1,000 individuals from multiple ethnic groups in the 1000. an intensive lifestyle intervention , as deployed in the diabetes prevention program , is effective regardless of genetic risk score for type 2 diabetes . given the rapid progress achieved in genetic discovery in type 2 diabetes and the multipronged approach deployed to overcome experimental limitations , there is great hope that the pace will be maintained and a substantial part of the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes will be elucidated in the coming years . if this vision is realized , a number of conceptual advances can be expected . the nosology of disease will be refined . type 2 diabetes , diagnosed solely on the basis of the final common pathway of hyperglycemia , is likely a heterogeneous syndrome that can be caused by a variety of processes . genetic etiologies have already helped classify the various forms of mody and neonatal diabetes , and an analogous exercise could take place in type 2 diabetes . the categorization of the disease into subtypes based on genetic determinants of physiology , prognosis , or predisposition to complications should help stratify the patient population into groups for which therapeutic or surveillance decisions might be better tailored . novel pathways will be identified . unsuspected biology is already being uncovered via genetic discovery . with a greater number of genetic loci at hand , pathways or systems ( e.g . , cell proliferation ) can be identified , some of which may be amenable to the development of new therapeutics . genetic discovery may identify drug targets . as mentioned above , among the initial type 2 diabetes genetic associations were coding variants for pparg , the gene that encodes the target of thiazolidinedi - ones , and kcnj11/abcc8 , the genes that encode the targets for sulfonylureas . more recent studies have identified the target for glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists as another type 2 diabetes-associated gene . this proof of principle for established type 2 diabetes drug targets indicates that among the many type 2 diabetes-associated loci , there might be other genes for which a suitable drug might be found or developed . aggregating all of the genetic data in humans and model systems , as well as ancillary associations that might point to off-target effects , will be essential if the genomic revolution is to catalyze new drug discovery . stratification of patients may allow for better targeting of public health or clinical trial interventions . some preventive or therapeutic measures may be too expensive to deploy in the population at large , or they may be futile in specific subgroups . genetic characterization may help identify the groups of people more likely to benefit from particular public health strategies . similarly , the efficiency of clinical trials may be enhanced by enrolling participants who are more likely to reach the desired endpoints or benefit from the agents being tested . genetics may facilitate the implementation of precision or personalized medicine . though it is not yet clear that genetic information will be powerful enough to apply therapeutic decisions at the individual level , it may help do so for specific subgroups . for example , genetic approaches may unveil who is more likely to develop a particular diabetic complication . for such an approach to be feasible , researchers envision that in the not too distant future , any individual who joins a public or private health care system would be genotyped or sequenced for the full list of actionable genetic variants ( e.g . , those that modify risk of common diseases or response to available medications ) , such that his/her information is available in the electronic medical record . when the time comes to make specific screening or therapeutic decisions , genetic information filtered through appropriate decision support tools would automatically guide the practitioner into the course of action most appropriate to the person and situation at hand . conclusion in sum , the genetics of type 2 diabetes is in a steep discovery curve . progress has been uneven , however , with most efforts focused on common variants and populations of european descent . the rapid and continuing progress in genotyping and sequencing technologies , with a concomitant improvement in affordability , the growing understanding of the human genome , and the ongoing development of analytical tools and methods present an optimistic perspective on the future . whether this newfound knowledge will translate into improved patient care depends on the ability to design and execute genetically based and outcomes-driven clinical trials . diabetes mellitus type 2 what is it ? diabetes is a common health problem in the u.s. and the world . in diabetes , the body does not use the food it digests well . it is hard for the body to use carbohydrates and fats . the main marker of diabetes is high blood sugar ( glucose ) . your blood sugar is kept in check by insulin . insulin is a hormone that is made in the pancreas . when you get diabetes , it is related to two things : the amount of insulin your body makes how well your bodys cells use insulin . there are two different types of diabetes : type 1 and type 2. only about 5 % of people have type 1. type 1 used to be called other names ( juvenile diabetes , insulin- dependent diabetes ) . in type 1 , the pancreas does not make insulin . it usually starts as a child or teen . type 2 often starts after age 40. type 2 used to be called other names too ( adult-onset diabetes ) . obese teens can also get type 2. in type 2 , your pancreas makes insulin . but , it does not make enough insulin . or , your body can not u se the insulin as well . this often happens when you are obese . at first , your body will make more insulin to try to keep up . but , when the body can no longer keep up , diabetes comes on . type 2 often runs in families . symptoms symptoms of type 2 come from high blood sugar . they include : frequent urination extreme thirst and hunger weight loss more likely to get skin and vaginal infections infections or cuts that heal very slowly or not at all . blood sugar that is not in control can lead to coma . there are two types of comas : the form that happens in type 1 diabetes ( called ketoacidosis ) the form that happens in type 2 diabetes ( called hyperosmolar ) you may take insulin or pills to make your blood sugar go down . if your blood sugar drops too far y ou will get low blood sugar ( called hypoglycemia ) . low blood sugar has symptoms . they include : sweating trembling dizziness hunger confusion seizures loss of consciousness . blood sugar that stays high leads to long term problems from diabetes . you may not notice these problems for years . these are some : damage to the eyes ( called retinopathy ) can cause blindness . damage to the nerves ( called neuropathy ) can cause numbness , tingling and pain in your feet , legs , and arms . usually people feel it in the feet first . damage to the kidneys ( called nephropathy ) can cause your kidneys to stop working . you need your kidneys to get rid of waste products . you are also more likely to get heart disease . your heart has arteries that carry blood to the rest of your body . the trouble comes on when your arteries get narrow ( called atherosclerosis ) . then , blood does not flow well to parts of the body . this can happen in different parts of the body : heart , brain , legs . and , it leads to different problems : coronary heart disease ( heart ) cerebrovascular disease ( brain ) peripheral artery disease ( legs ) diabetes education # symptoms include : chest pain heart attack heart failure stroke leg pain when you walk or exercise that feels better when you rest . you may have trouble getting blood to your legs and feet . this can cause foot ulcers and infections . the ulcers and infection can cause tissue to die ( called gangrene ) . this in turn may lead to amputation . what your doctor looks for your doctor will look for signs of diabetes . obesity , especially around the middle ( abdominal obesity ) . this is a waist that is more than 40 inches around in men or 35 inches around in women . high blood pressure signs of eye disease on eye examination decreased feeling and reflexes in the legs poor pulses in the feet blisters , ulcers or infections of the feet abnormal heart rhythm your doctor will also do lab tests . fasting blood sugar ( this tests your blood sugar before you have had anything to eat or drink . ) hemoglobin a1c ( this test measures your average blood sugar level over the past 2 to 3 months . ) lipid profile ( this measures cholesterol , triglycerides , hdl and ldl cholesterol . it tells how likely it is that your arteries are narrowed . ) blood creatinine and urine microalbumin ( these tests look for signs of kidney disease . ) your doctor may also do an eye exam . he/she will look for early signs of eye disease . your doctor may also do a foot and ankle exam . he/she will touch your foot with a small wire . this tests whether you can feel the wire on your feet and ankles . diagnosis your doctor will use your fasting blood tests to see if you have diabetes . your blood sugar should not be more than 126 mg/dl on this test . you have diabetes if : your blood sugar is more than 126 , and you number stays high on more than one fasting test . expected duration there is no cure for diabetes . it lasts your whole life . type 2 can get much better in some obese people who lose weight and keep it off . prevention you can help prevent type 2 diabetes . you should keep your body weight within the normal range for your height . this is key if diabetes runs in your family . if you already have diabetes , its not too late . you can delay or stop later problems ( retinopathy , neuropathy , nephropathy ) . be sure to keep tight control of your blood sugar . there are ways to lower your risk of heart problems . you should not smoke . here are risk factors you can help control : high blood pressure high blood fats ( cholesterol and triglycerides ) obesity treatment and management in most people who have type 2 diabetes , treatment starts with weight . diet and exercise are used for weight loss . the diet is like ones used to lower bad fats and stop risk of heart disease . most people who have type 2 can control their blood sugar with pills at first . these include ones in the table . you may use pills for many years . but , over time , you may need insulin . or , you may need insulin right away . you should talk to your doctor about which medicine is right for you . metformin is suggested as the first one to try . diabetes education # medicine class medicine name how it works sulfonylureas repaglinide ( prandin ) nateglinide ( starlix ) increases the amount of insulin released by your pancreas biguanide metformin ( glucophage ) lowers the amount of sugar produced by the liver , helps your body use insulin better thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone ( avandia ) pioglitazone ( actos ) helps your body use insulin better alpha-glucosidase inhibitors acarbose ( precose ) delays the absorption of sugars from the intestine the pills used to treat type 2 diabetes can have many side effects . see the table for the major ones . medicine side effects sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) weight gain metformin + insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) thiazolidinedione + insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) metformin nausea and diarrhea ( less common if you take the medicine with a meal ) life threatening problems for people who already have liver or kidney disease . thiazolindinediones can affect your liver so you need to have routine blood tests acarbose extreme gas and bloating you should treat high bad cholesterol ( ldl ) . medicines that work to lower this are in the table . type of medicine medicine statins to lower ldl cholesterol lovastatin , pravastatin , simvastatin , fluvastatin , atorvastatin , rosuvastatin bile acid sequestrants to lower ldl cholesterol cholestyramine ( questran ) , colestipol ( colestid ) , colesevelam ( welchol ) new medicine to lower ldl cholesterol ezetimibe ( zetia ) medicines to lower triglycerides gemfibrozil , fenofibrate to control diabetes you should watch your diet , keep fit , and take your pills . if this is not enough , you may need to take insulin each day . you may also need to stick to a meal plan and eat meals at regular times . this will lessen your chances of having low blood sugar . test your blood sugar each day . this is a key part of managing your diabetes . this is true no matter which medicines you take . you will use a tiny needle ( called a lancet ) to get a small bit of blood . the fingertip is usually the place that is used . the testing meter will tell you how much sugar is in your blood . you should know the target ranges for your blood sugar . 90 120 mg/dl before you have had anything to eat or drink 120 180 mg/dl after meals if you know your blood sugar level you can choose types and amounts of food . you can also choose how to keep active . if your blood sugar is always diabetes education # in the target range , you are not cured . it means that you are doing a good job of managing your diabetes . you will have a better chance at a good quality of life . it is less likely that you will have long term problems from diabetes . when to call your doctor with diabetes , you are at higher risk for loss of body fluids ( dehydration ) . call the doctor if you have nausea or vomiting that lasts . follow the testing schedule your doctor gives you for sick days . this should tell you how often to test : your blood sugar your urine for ketones . call your doctor right away if : you have blood sugars that are very high ( more than 400 500 mg/dl ) . your doctor may want you to call before it gets that high . you have large amounts of ketones in your urine . have your family call the doctor right away if you show these signs : dehydration dry skin nausea vomiting confusion coma these are signs of severe high blood sugar problems ( ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar coma ) . prognosis type 2 diabetes can have a good outcome . there are things you must do to help . control your blood sugar . maintain a normal weight . reduce your risk factors for heart disease . basic genetics and molecular biology basic genetics- the laws of inheritance are investigated by genetics . the different nucleic acids ( dna and rna ) in the living organism play a central role in the inheritance of the different features . the information in the dna molecule is inherited from one generation to the next generation through reproduction . it means that the hereditary material is the dna ( in some viruses the rna ) , more exactly the genes which are the functional units which determine the nature of the features . gene definition : genes are the units of inheritance . genes are pieces of dna that contain information for synthesis of ribonucleic acids ( rnas ) or polypeptides . earlier , only those units were regarded genes , which coded proteins . nowadays , genes are also those , which code functional rnas , which are not transcribed to proteins . these are called non - coding rnas . in the so - called rna- viruses ( e.g . influenza , hiv1 ) genes are coded only in the form of rna . the appearance of an organism which results from the expression of an organism 's genes , as well as the influence of environmental factors and the interactions between the two is called phenotype . the genetic background of an organism is called genotype . the majority of the dna content of the cells is packaged in chromosomes , and dna can be also found in mitochondria . in diploid cells , a couple of homologous chromosomes are a set of one maternal chromosome and one paternal chromosome that pair up with each other inside a cell during meiosis . these copies have the same genes in the same locations , or loci . in the nature , a given gene can have different variations , these are called alleles . in a given population , the most frequent allele of a gene is called wild type . if in a diploid cell the same alleles occur in a given locus of the homologous chromosomes , then the organism is homozygous , if the alleles are different , it is heterozygous at this locus . mendelian inheritance- the founder of the modern science of genetics was johann gregor mendel . mendel 's pea plant experiments established many of the rules of heredity , now referred to as the laws of mendelian inheritance . mendel ’ s laws are law of segregation , law of independent assortment , and law of dominance . law of segregation ( the `` first law `` ) states that the two alleles for a heritable character segregate ( separate from each other ) during gamete formation and end up in different gametes . law of independent assortment ( the `` second law `` ) , also known as `` inheritance law `` , states that separate genes for separate traits are passed independently of one another from parents to offspring . law of dominance ( the `` third law `` ) states that recessive alleles will always be masked by dominant alleles . therefore , a cross between a homozygous dominant and a homozygous recessive will always express the dominant phenotype , while still having a heterozygous genotype . a mendelian trait is one that is controlled by a single locus in an inheritance pattern . in such cases , a mutation in a single gene can cause a disease that is inherited according to mendel 's laws . these diseases are called monogenic diseases . dominant - recessive inheritance in dominantly inherited diseases only one faulty gene is enough for the manifestation of the disease . such disease is e.g . familial hypercholesterolemia or huntington disease . in cases of recessive diseases , the faulty gene product is compensated by the normal variant . in this case , two mutated homologous genes are required for the manifestation of the disease . such diseases are e.g . cystic fibrosis or albinism . the codominant inheritance is a variation of the dominant - recessive inheritance . in case of codominant inheritance , two different alleles of a gene can be expressed , and each version makes a slightly different protein . both alleles influence the genetic trait or determine the characteristics of the genetic condition . e.g . blood type ab is inherited in a codominant pattern . here the a and b blood group is dominant over o blood group and show codominant inheritance to each other . it means that if a person has one gene for a blood group , one for o blood group , then his/her blood group will be a , in the case of one a and one b , the blood group will be ab . polygenic inheritance- in most cases , however , a trait or feature is determined more than one allele pair . often the genes are large in quantity , but small in effect . examples of human polygenic inheritance are height , skin color , eye color , weight and diseases like diabetes mellitus , high blood pressure , asthma , allergy , or atherosclerosis . genetic pleiotropy- it can also occur that an allele pair is responsible for more than one trait . here , the product of the gene participates in several metabolic pathways , which have effects on different organs or tissues . in this case , mutations in this gene can have different consequences . it is called genetic pleiotropy . a classic example of pleiotropy is the human disease phenylketonuria ( pku ) . this disease can cause mental retardation and reduced hair and skin pigmentation and can be caused by any of a large number of mutations in a single gene that codes for the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase , which converts the amino acid phenylalanine to tyrosine , another amino acid . sex - linked inheritance : humans have altogether 46 chromosomes , which consist of 22 pairs of autosomes in both females and males and two sex chromosomes . there are two copies of the x- chromosome in females ( homogametic ) , but males have a single x- chromosome and a y- chromosome ( heterogametic ) . genes on the x or y chromosome are called sex-linked . since humans have many more genes on the x than the y , there are many more x-linked traits than y-linked traits . the gender of the offspring is determined by the sperm . cytogenetics is a field of genetics dealing with species or cell specific number of chromosomes , and their structure and characteristic segments , their functional roles , and all the differences- namely the chromosomal mutations - related to them . with cytogenetic methods ( e.g . with chromosome staining ) the chromosome x and y can be easily differentiated . chromosome x is significantly larger than the y. both chromosomes contain homologous and non-homologous regions . the non-homologous regions contain genes which do not have pairs in the other chromosome . in males , these genes are in hemizygotic state . females possessing one x-linked recessive mutation are considered carriers and will generally not manifest clinical symptoms of the disorder . all males possessing an x-linked recessive mutation will be affected , since males have only a single x-chromosome and therefore have only one copy of x-linked genes . all offspring of a carrier female have a 50 % chance of inheriting the mutation if the father does not carry the recessive allele . all female children of an affected father will be carriers ( assuming the mother is not affected or a carrier ) , as daughters possess their father 's x-chromosome . no male children of an affected father will be affected , as males only inherit their father 's y-chromosome . because sex chromosomes contain different numbers of genes , different species of organisms have developed different mechanisms to cope with this inequality . dosage compensation is the equalization of gene expression in males and females of a species . in humans , the females ( xx ) silence the transcription of one x chromosome and transcribe all information only from the one expressed x chromosome . thus , females have the same amount of expressed x-linked genes as the human males ( xy ) who have just the one x chromosome to express from which to transcribe and express genes . the x inactivation , also called lyonization happens early in embryonic development at random . the inactive x chromosome in a female somatic cell is called a barr body . linked inheritance , recombination : if two genes are close to each other on a chromosome , then the associated traits inherited together . in this case , the mendel ’ s first and second laws are not valid , and this phenomenon is called linked inheritance , and the two genes are in linkage . in meiosis , dna replication is followed by two rounds of cell division to produce four daughter cells with half the number of chromosomes as the original parent cell . the two meiotic divisions are known as meiosis I and meiosis ii . before meiosis begins , during s phase of the cell cycle , the dna of each chromosome is replicated so that it consists of two identical sister chromatids attached at a centromere . in meiosis i , homologous chromosomes pair with each other and can exchange genetic material in a process called chromosomal crossover or crossing over or homologous recombination . during this process , the alleles of the two homologous chromosomes can exchange with each other . recombination results in a new arrangement of maternal and paternal alleles on the same chromosome . although the same genes appear in the same order , but some alleles are different . during meiosis , crossing over occurs between two homologous chromosomes . on two strands , the order of the alleles changed . mutation : mutation is a permanent alteration in the dna sequence , such that the sequence differs from what is found in most people . mutations range in size ; they can affect anywhere from a single dna building block ( base pair ) to a large segment of a chromosome that includes multiple genes . the exact cause of a given mutation is generally unknown . mutations can occur through the effect of a mutagenic agent or during the replication of the dna . during replication , on average , one mutation occurs in every 100 millionth nucleotides . the effect of the majority of mutations does not appear phenotypically , but if it occurs on a functionally important position , then the consequence can even be serious illnesses , like cancer or inherited diseases . if the mutation occurs in a gene , then it is called gene mutation . the chromosomes are fragile structures if they are mutated it is called chromosome mutation . chromosome mutation can be : duplication , deletion , translocation , inversion and insertion . basics of molecular biology : the central dogma in molecular biology can be described as `` dna makes rna and rna makes protein , `` . however , this simplification does not make it clear that the central dogma does not preclude the reverse flow of information from rna to dna , only ruling out the flow from protein to rna or dna . some characteristics of the human dna : the proteins coded by the dna in our cells determine the structures and functions of the cells . if there is a mutation in the dna , it can change the structure and function of the protein , which can have consequences on the function of the cell and can lead to diseases . the structure of the dna in our cells where the backbone of the dna strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar residues . the sugar in dna is 2-deoxyribose , which is a pentose ( five - carbon ) sugar . the sugars are joined together by phosphate groups that form phosphodiester bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings . these asymmetric bonds mean a strand of dna has a direction . in a double helix , the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand : the strands are antiparallel . the asymmetric ends of dna strands are called the 5 ’ ( five prime ) and 3 ’ ( three prime ) ends , with the 5 ’ end having a terminal phosphate group and the 3 ’ end a terminal hydroxyl group . one major difference between dna and rna is the sugar , with the 2-deoxyribose in dna being replaced by the alternative pentose sugar ribose in rna . the four bases found in dna are adenine ( abbreviated a ) , cytosine ( c ) , guanine ( g ) and thymine ( t ) . these four bases are attached to the sugar/phosphate to form the complete nucleotide , as shown for adenosine monophosphate . the nucleobases are classified into two types : the purines , a and g , being fused five- and six-membered heterocyclic compounds , and the pyrimidines , the six-membered rings c and t. a fifth pyrimidine nucleobase , uracil ( u ) , usually takes the place of thymine in rna and differs from thymine by lacking a methyl group on its ring . uracil is not usually found in dna , occurring only as a breakdown product of cytosine . in a dna double helix , each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand . this is called complementary base pairing . here , purines form hydrogen bonds to pyrimidines , with adenine bonding only to thymine in two hydrogen bonds , and cytosine bonding only to guanine in three hydrogen bonds . this arrangement of two nucleotides binding together across the double helix is called a base pair . as hydrogen bonds are not covalent , they can be broken and rejoined relatively easily . the two strands of dna in a double helix can therefore be pulled apart like a zipper , either by a mechanical force or high temperature . as a result of this complementarity , all the information in the double-stranded sequence of a dna helix is duplicated on each strand , which is vital in dna replication . indeed , this reversible and specific interaction between complementary base pairs is critical for all the functions of dna in living organisms . a dna sequence is called `` sense `` if its sequence is the same as that of a messenger rna copy that is translated into protein . the sequence on the opposite strand is called the `` antisense `` sequence . both sense and antisense sequences can exist on different parts of the same strand of dna ( i.e . both strands can contain both sense and antisense sequences ) . in human cells , dna is in two compartments . nuclear dna , or nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid ( n dna ) , is dna contained within a nucleus of the cell . nuclear dna encodes for the majority of the genome , with dna located in mitochondria coding for the rest . nuclear dna adheres to mendelian inheritance , with information coming from two parents , one male and one female . the other dna containing compartment is the mitochondria . mitochondria are cellular organelles within eukaryotic cells that convert chemical energy from food into a form that cells can use , adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) . in most multicellular organisms , including humans , the mitochondrial dna ( mt dna ) is inherited from the mother ( maternally inherited ) . nuclear dna and mitochondrial dnadiffer in many ways . the structure of nuclear dna chromosomes is linear with open ends and includes 46 chromosomes containing more than 3 billion nucleotides ( 3.38 * 10^9 ) . mitochondrial dna chromosomes have closed , circular structures , and contain 16,569 nucleotides . nuclear dna is located within the nucleus of eukaryote cells and usually has two copies per cell , while mitochondrial dna is located in the mitochondria and contains 100 to 1,000 copies per cell . nuclear dna contains more than 20 thousand protein coding and more than 23 thousand non-coding genes . the mitochondrial dna contains 37 genes . of the 37 genes , 13 are protein coding , 2 rrna and 22 trna coding genes . the mutation rate for nuclear dna is less than 0.3 % while that of mitochondrial dna is generally higher . as mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell , mutations of its dna will have an effect on the power production processes of the cell , and will have serious consequences especially in tissues with large power need , like liver , neurons and muscle . as the mutation rate in the mitochondrial dna goes higher , the mitochondrial diseases usually deteriorate with age , and can play also a role in the aging processes . replication- dna replication is the process of producing two identical replicas from one original dna molecule . this biological process occurs in all living organisms and is the basis for biological inheritance . dna is made up of two strands and each strand of the original dna molecule serves as a template for the production of the complementary strand , a process referred to as semiconservative replication . cellular proofreading and error-checking mechanisms ensure near perfect fidelity for dna replication . dna polymerases are a family of enzymes that carry out all forms of dna replication . dna polymerases add nucleotides to the 3 ' end of a strand of dna . if a mismatch is accidentally incorporated , the polymerase is inhibited from further extension . proofreading removes the mismatched nucleotide and extension continues . transcription- transcription is the first step of gene expression , in which a particular segment of dna is copied into rna ( messenger rna or mrna ) by the enzyme rna polymerase . rna polymerase , and therefore the initiation of transcription , requires the presence of a core promoter sequence in the dna . promoters are regions of dna that promote transcription and , in eukaryotes , are found at -30 , -75 , and -90 base pairs upstream from the transcription start site . transcription factors are proteins that bind to these promoter sequences and facilitate the binding of rna polymerase . one strand of the dna , the template strand ( also noncoding or antisense strand ) , is used as a template for rna synthesis . as transcription proceeds , rna polymerase traverses the template strand and uses base pairing complementarity with the dna template to create a n rna copy . although rna polymerase traverses the template str and from 3 ' 5 ' , the coding ( non - template or sense ) strand and newly formed rna can also be used as reference points , so transcription can be described as occurring 5 ' 3 ' . this produces an rna molecule from 5 ' - > 3 ' , an exact copy of the coding strand ( except that thymines are replaced with uracils , and the nucleotides are composed of a ribose ( 5-carbon ) sugar . structure of the genes the structure of a protein coding gene consists of many elements of which the actual protein coding sequence is often only a small part . these include dna regions that are not transcribed as well as untranslated regions of the rna . firstly , flanking the open reading frame , all genes contain regulatory sequence that is required for their expression . in order to be expressed , genes require a promoter sequence . the promoter is recognized and bound by transcription factors and rna polymerase to initiate transcription . additionally , genes can have regulatory regions many kilobases upstream or downstream of the open reading frame . these act by binding to transcription factors which then cause the dna to loop so that the regulatory sequence ( and bound transcription factor ) become close to the rna polymerase binding site . for example , enhancers increase transcription by binding an activator protein which then helps to recruit the rna polymerase to the promoter ; conversely , silencers bind repressor proteins and make the dna less available for rna polymerase . the transcribed pre-mrna contains untranslated regions at both ends which contain a ribosome binding site , terminator and start and stop codons . in addition , most eukaryotic open reading frames contain untranslated introns which are removed before the exons are translated . the sequences at the ends of the introns , dictate the splice sites to generate the final mature mrna which encodes the protein or rna product . splicing is a modification of the nascent pre-mrna transcript in which introns are removed and exons are joined . for nuclear encoded genes , splicing takes place within the nucleus after or concurrently with transcription . alternative splicing is a regulated process during gene expression that results in a single gene coding for multiple proteins . in this process , particular exons of a gene may be included within or excluded from the final , processed messenger rna ( mrna ) produced from that gene . consequently , the proteins translated from alternatively spliced mrnas will contain differences in their amino acid sequence and , often , in their biological functions . notably , alternative splicing allows the human genome to direct the synthesis of many more proteins than would be expected from its 20,000 protein - coding genes . alternative splicing . because of this process , one gene can code for several proteins . the genetic code is the set of rules by which information encoded within genetic material ( dna or mrna sequences ) is translated into proteins by living cells . biological decoding is accomplished by the ribosome , which links amino acids in an order specified by mrna , using transfer rna ( trna ) molecules to carry amino acids and to read the mrna three nucleotides at a time . the genetic code is highly similar among all organisms and can be expressed in a simple table with 64 entries . the code defines how sequences of these nucleotide triplets , called codons , specify which amino acid will be added next during protein synthesis . with some exceptions , a three-nucleotide codon in a nucleic acid sequence specifies a single amino acid . because the vast majority of genes are encoded with exactly the same code , this particular code is often referred to as the canonical or standard genetic code , or simply the genetic code , though in fact some variant codes have evolved . for example , protein synthesis in human mitochondria relies on a genetic code that differs from the standard genetic code . translation starts with a chain initiation codon or start codon . the most common start codon is aug , which is read as methionine . the three stop codons have been given names : uag is amber , uga is opal ( sometimes also called umber ) , and uaa is ochre . stop codons are also called `` termination `` or `` nonsense `` codons . they signal release of the nascent polypeptide from the ribosome because there is no cognate trna that has anticodons complementary to these stop signals , and so a release factor binds to the ribosome instead . degeneracy is the redundancy of the genetic code . the genetic code has redundancy but no ambiguity . for example , although codons gaa and gag both specify glutamic acid ( redundancy ) , neither of them specifies any other amino acid ( no ambiguity ) . translation : in translation , mrna is decoded by a ribosome to produce a specific amino acid chain , or polypeptide . the polypeptide later folds into an active protein and performs its functions in the cell . the ribosome facilitates decoding by inducing the binding of complementary transfer rna ( trna ) anticodon sequences to mrna codons . the trnas carry specific amino acids that are chained together into a polypeptide as the m rna passes through and is `` read `` by the ribosome . the entire process is a part of gene expression . after the translation , some proteins are modified through a process called post-translational modification . post-translational modification refers to the covalent and generally enzymatic modification of proteins during or after protein biosynthesis . post-translational modifications can occur on the amino acid side chains or at the protein 's c- or n- termini . they can extend the chemical repertoire of the 20 standard amino acids by introducing new functional groups such as phosphate , acetate , amide groups , or methyl groups . other forms of post-translational modification consist of cleaving peptide bonds , as in processing a propeptide to a mature form or removing the initiator methionine residue . the formation of disulfide bonds from cysteine residues may also be referred to as a post-translational modification . for instance , the peptide hormone insulin is cut twice after disulfide bonds are formed , and a propeptide is removed from the middle of the chain ; the resulting protein consists of two polypeptide chains connected by disulfide bonds . transmission of genetic information- cell cycle and regulation of cell cycle- in a given organism the genetic information ( dna ) is transferred from cell to cell during the cell cycle . in the cell cycle , the cellular content is duplicated then it is halved . however , a distinction must be drawn between the nuclear and cytoplasmic events . dna duplication ( in chromatin form of dna ) and halving ( in chromosome form of dna ) are very precisely regulated processes , resulting two genetically identical cells . at the same time , the growing of the cytoplasm followed by division in two are less strictly regulated events of cell cycle . the duplication of cellular ingredients occurs in interphase , that is divided into g1 ( preduplication or preceding dna duplication ) , s ( dna synthesis ) and g2 ( postduplication ) phases . in m-phase the previously duplicated cellular content is separated , in mitosis the chromosomes , followed by cytokinesis , the division of cytoplasm . cell proliferation rate in an adult multicellular organism is variable . moreover , most of the cells are in so-called g0 phase , where there is no cell division , sometimes not even growth . the cells need extracellular stimuli , e.g . growth factors and/or adhesion to other cells or extracellular matrix in order to reenter g1 phase . in the cell cycle a very sophisticated control system ( cell cycle control system ) functions , whose essential components are the cyclin-dependent protein kinases , the cdk-s. cdk-s are activated by another protein family , by cyclins , the amount of which cyclically varies during the cell cycle . beside cyclins , the activity of cyclin- dependent kinases is regulated by other factors , too . these factors include activating and inhibiting cdk kinases which phosphorylate cdk-s , resulting cdk activation and inhibition , respectively . phosphate residues are removed by phosphatases , modifying cdk activity . according to their names , cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors inhibit cdk activity . the amount of all the proteins mentioned before may be regulated via transcriptional and translational level and by proteasomal degradation , followed by ubiquitination . all these together allow a highly organized , complex but gentle control of the cell cycle . the cyclin-dependent kinases , the main actors of cell cycle control system , operate the cell cycle through phosphorylation of many different target proteins . recently , in addition to cyclin-dependent kinases , the role of some other kinases ( e.g . polo , aurora etc . ) was found . the phases of cell cycle are not interchangeable , they have to follow each other in a strict order . operation of checkpoints in the cell cycle ensures to give rise to genetically identical cells by cell cycle . phases ( g1 , s , g2 , m ) and checkpoints ( g1 , g2 , m ) of cell cycle . cell cycle control system allows to overstep checkpoints if the conditions are suitable for the cell to proceed to the next phase . the main checkpoints are the following : g1 checkpoint ( in higher eukaryotes it is referred to as restriction point ) , where first of all the integrity of dna is checked , operates at the end of the g1 phase . the second checkpoint is at the end of g2 phase , it is the g2 checkpoint , where the accuracy and integrity of dna is monitored . finally , the function of m checkpoint , in the metaphase of mitosis is to ensure the appropriate attachment of all chromosomes to the microtubules of the mitotic spindle before the duplicated chromosomes are separated . multicellular ( mammalian ) cell cycle and the regulation . g0-g1 transition : in an adult multicellular organism most cells do not divide , they are found in a special phase , g0 phase . g0 phase cells lack functional cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases , the main cell cycle regulators . if proliferation is necessary , these g0 phase cells have to return into the cell cycle , essentially have to pass g1 checkpoint or restriction point . it is induced by growth factors or extracellular matrix components initiating transcription and translation of d cyclin and reduction of cdk inhibitors by stimulating their proteasomal degradation . these cdk inhibitors : p16 , p1 5 , p18 and p19 specifically inhibit cdk4 and cdk6 by preventing the binding of activating d cyclin , and also the activity of cdk-cyclin complex . the main target of active cdk4/6-d cyclin complex is prb ( rb stands for retinoblastoma , a malignant disease of the retina caused by the mutation of prb encoding gene ) , p107 and p130 proteins . the phosphorylation of these proteins causes conformational changes , and they release e2f transcription factors . and it is the turning point in g0-g1 transition , because e2f transcription factors induce the transcription of several s-phase specific genes , such as e cyclin , a cyclin , thymidine kinase , dna polymerase etc . e cyclin activates cdk2 whose main target , similarly to the cdk4/6-d-cyclin is rb protein , the phosphorylation of which is enhanced ( positive feedback ) . cdk2 has another activator , a cyclin , their complex is essential in s phase initiation . disadvantageous environmental effects , e.g . hypoxia ( excessive proliferation of cells may result not sufficient blood flow ) or dna damages activate g1 checkpoint machinery and it will stop the cell cycle . the amount and activity of p53 is increased which in turn induces the transcription of a cdk inhibitor protein , p21 . p21 is a general cdk inhibitor , hence it inhibits all cdk-cyclin complexes : cdk4/6 – d cyclin , cdk2 – e cyclin and cdk2 – a cyclin , so the cell cycle is halted and the cell may not enter s phase . this general cdk inhibitor family has two other members , p27 and p57 . these proteins prevent the duplication of damaged dna , suspend the cell cycle , allowing error correction . briefly , their activity prevents the cell cycle resulting genetically different cells . summary of g0-g1 transition : the cdk inhibitor encoding genes are tumor suppressor genes whose mutations in homozygote form ( recessive ) are the main contributors of tumor development . the most well-known tumor suppressor gene species are p53 and prb encoding genes . about half of the tumors lack functional p53 . the genes encoding cell cycle stimulating proteins ( cdk-s , cyclins , growth factors and many others ) are protooncogenes . their mutation in heterozygote form ( dominant ) is also involved in tumor development . g1-s transition , s-phase : the main s phase event is the dna duplication , the replication . since eukaryotic cell dna is much higher than prokaryotic , the replication starts simultaneously at several sites , called origos , and occurs in both directions . initiation proteins associate with origos where dna unwinds , followed by the attachment of further components of replication complex . as throughout the whole cell cycle cyclin-dependent kinases play major role in g1-s transition , too . cdk2-e cyclin complex activation requires the degradation of the cdk inhibitor p27 , which step is initiated by an ubiquitin ligase , scf ( skp-cullin-f-box protein ) . finally , the activated cdk2 ( and another protein kinase , cdc7 ) phosphorylate some , not exactly known members of the replication complex . this effect fulfills another role , too , namely it prevents the formation or the binding of new initiation complexes , and hence , the dna is replicated only once . in dna replication , both strands of dna serve as template , and appropriate nucleotides built in according to the complementarity of the nucleotide chain . as it was demonstrated by the experiments applying radioactive isotope labelled monomers , dna synthesis is semi-conservative , since after the replication both dna molecules have one old and a newly synthesized strand . since the sequence of dna strand unambiguously determines the sequence of complementer dna strand , the arising two dna molecules are equal . g2-m transition : the regulation of g2-m transition is better known than that of g1-s transition . the m-phase is triggered by mpf ( m-phase or mitosis promoting factor ) , that is a complex of b cyclin and cdk1 . after the binding of these proteins , post-translational modifications are required for the final activation . cdk1 component of the complex is the substrate of two kinases , one is an activating kinase which adds a phosphate group to a tyrosine , the other is an inactivating kinase which phosphorylates a threonine residue of the protein . the latter is removed by a phosphatase ( product of a gene belonging to cdc25 gene family ) , and this is the last step in mpf activation . but all these events will only happen if g2 checkpoint machinery finds dna undamaged and correctly replicated . mpf activation . b cyclin binds to cdk1 which is phosphorylated by an activating and an inactivating kinase . inactivating phosphate group is cleaved by a phosphatase resulting an active mpf . mpf has numerous substrates , first of all it activates cdc25 protein , thus by a positive feedback control more and more mpf is activated . in mammalian cells there are three phosphatases : cdc25 a , b , and c , at this point of cell cycle regulation , the c type operates . then , mpf triggers m-phase through the phosphorylation of further target proteins , like lamin a , b , and c , components of nuclear lamin a , a structure attached to the inner nuclear membrane . it results disintegration of nuclear membrane . mpf indirectly inhibits actomyosin atp-ase activity causing rearrangement of microfilaments and consequently rounding of the cell and also inhibiting premature cytokinesis . one of the major events , the chromosome condensation is triggered also by mpf , through the phosphorylation of condensins , h1 and h3 histones . phosphorylation of map-s ( microtubules associated proteins ) changes the arrangement of microtubule system and induces mitotic spindle formation needed for chromosome separation . in g2-m phase transition the apc ( anaphase promoting complex ) having role later in metaphase-anaphase transition is indirectly activated by mpf . m-phase : the m-phase is a complex process of successive steps , a series of events , used to be divided into mitosis and cytokinesis . in the first half of the m-phase , in mitosis , the doubled dna divides in two , followed by the separation of cytoplasm , by the phase of cytokinesis . in mitosis the following phases are distinguished : prophase- in the nucleus the nuclear chromatin gradually changes to chromosomes by the maximal condensation of dna . since before the m-phase the dna has been replicated , each chromosome comprises two chromatids ( sister chromatids ) . in the cytoplasm the centrosome , which also has been doubled in interphase , splits into two and move to opposite poles of the cell , and organize the mitotic spindle composed of microtubules . prometaphase- nucleolus disappears , the chromosome development continues . the nuclear membrane disintegrates , too . kinetochore microtubules binding kinetochore protein complex associate to the centromere region of each chromatid . metaphase- the chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane of the cell by the help of kinetochore microtubules . kinetochore regions face the two poles of the cell , and the kinetochore microtubules bind to sister chromatids of a chromosome from opposite direction . anaphase- sister chromatids of chromosomes split and move toward the poles of the cell . in the first half of anaphase ( anaphase a ) , the kinetochore , later in the second half of anaphase ( anaphase b ) , the polar microtubules operate . it is the shortest phase of mitosis . telophase- kinetochore microtubules disappear , nuclear membrane is reorganized around the chromatids at the cell poles . chromosomes decondense , they become chromatin . nucleoli are reformed . polar microtubules lengthen further the cell . the mitosis , the division of nuclear content is followed by : cytokinesis- the separation of the cytoplasm begins in the late anaphase and is completed after the telophase . in the middle of the cell , perpendicular to the axis of the mitotic spindle cleavage furrow appears which gradually deepens and thus the connection between the two half cells narrows . the overlapping region of polar microtubules makes so-called midbody . finally , the cytoplasm completely splits . chromosome structure : in m-phase , the long eukaryotic dna molecules have to be packed in small chromosomes to be able to accurately halve without breaks . meanwhile , the original length of the dna ( several cm ) is reduced by ten thousands fold ( few m ) . the molecular mechanism of this packaging is still not known in detail . two nm wide dna double helix wraps the octamers of histones ( 2 of each h2a , h2b , h3 and h4 histone molecules ) forming nucleosomes , disc-like structures connected by the continuous dna molecule . it is called nucleosomal structure having a diameter of 11 nm . h1 histone folds six nucleosomes in one plane to give a diameter of 30 nm fiber called chromatin or solenoid . the chromatin fiber is attached to a protein scaffold and forms loops . these loops are the basic unit of replication and transcription , and this structure is 300 nm wide . finally , it is further compressed and folded to produce the chromatids of 1400 nm wide metaphase chromosome . the final step of chromosome condensation is induced by the mpf activated condensins . there are two protein complexes of similar structure influencing different dna functions : the condensins and the cohesins . they are composed of different smc ( structural maintenance of chromosomes ) proteins having atpase activity and regulatory functions , all associate in a ring-like structure . metaphase chromosome has very characteristic morphological structure . as the dna is doubled in the s phase , chromosome comprises two sister chromatids . after dna synthesis , the dna molecules are held together by the ring-like cohesin complexes . much of this cohesins detaches during the prophase , and at the end of metaphase , it is found only at the primary constriction of chromosomes specified as centromere region . this peri-centromeric cohesin is cleaved in early anaphase allowing the separation of chromatids . chromosomes are usually classified according to the location of the centromere region . during prophase and prometaphase , a special three-layer plate of protein structure called kinetochore associates to the centromeres of chromosomes . beside many other proteins , kinetochore contains both dynein and kinesin-type motor proteins , and the role of it is to bind kinetochore microtubules ( about 30 40/sister chromatids ) . in scleroderma , which is an autoimmune disease , patients produce antibodies against some of the kinetochore proteins . the centromere divides the sister chromatids into two arms , the ends of the arms are called telomeres . loss of telomeres makes the chromosomes instable . there are 5 pairs of human chromosomes having not only primary , but secondary constriction or nor ( nucleolar organizer region ) too , which contains a high number of copies of the large ( 45s ) rrna gene . disappearance and re-formation of nuclear envelope : as it was mentioned before , the lamins of nuclear lamina attached to the inner surface of nuclear envelope are phosphorylated by mpf , causing the dissociation of nuclear membrane into vesicles . lamin b remains in the membrane of vesicles , but lamin a and c are found in soluble form in the cytoplasm . the highly organized nuclear pores are also decomposed . at the end of mitosis , in the telophase , the phosphatases are activated and dephosphorylate the lamins . the reformation of nuclear envelope begins on the surface of chromosomes . they move closer to each other , and the membranes fuse and the pores are also reorganized . finally , the chromosomes decondense to chromatin . structure and role of mitotic spindle : the components of mitotic spindle are the centrosomes and the microtubules . in human cells , the major microtubule organizer center ( mtoc ) is the centrosome ; in interphase cells , it is located usually near to the nucleus . the structure of centrosome is the following : in the center , there are two perpendicular cylindrical bodies ( the centrioles ) , which are connected by proteins at their bases . the centrioles are made of 9x3 microtubules in windmill-like arrangement . around them , an amorphous , unstructured material , the pericentriolar matrix is located , in which numerous different proteins are found . the microtubules grow out from the pericentriolar matrix in star-like manner , this region is called aster . minus ends of microtubules face the centrioles , their plus ends face outward . the microtubules are organized , the tubulin heterodimer polymerization is induced by a special subtype of tubulin , found in- tubulin rings in the pericentriolar matrix . schematic figure of centrosome : there are two centrioles in the center , surrounded by pericentriolar matrix ( pcm ) which is the nucleation site of microtubules ( yturc=y tubulin ring complex ) . to produce genetically identical cells through the cell cycle not only the accurate replication and separation of dna , but the precise duplication and division of centrosome are needed . if there is no centrosome duplication , there is no bipolar mitotic spindle , no division and the chromosomes are not able to separate in two . however , if centrosome is repeatedly duplicated , more poles are made in the cells and the chromosomes are unevenly distributed between the daughter cells . in late g1 phase , the centrioles slightly move away from each other , and in the s-phase , perpendicularly to the original one the development of new centrioles begin . in late g2 and early mitosis . the two pairs of centrioles are separated from each other , migrate to the two poles of the cell by the help of microtubule system and motor proteins . at the poles , the new centrosomes nucleate the microtubules of mitotic spindle . mitotic spindle organization also needs the activation of mpf . at the beginning of division , the map-s microtubule associated proteins are phosphorylated by mpf , which in turn changes the characteristic interphase microtubule arrangement and induces the development of mitotic spindle . in interphase , there are few , long , and relatively stable microtubules . oppositely , the mitotic spindle is characterized by many , short and highly dynamic microtubules . in prophase , many dynamic microtubules grow in all directions back away from the centrosomes . the attachment to any structure by their + end stabilizes the microtubules . the microtubules growing from different poles may bind to each other giving rise to the partly overlapping polar microtubules . in the overlapping region + end motor proteins are found , which stabilize the polar microtubules and are also needed to push apart the two poles in anaphase b. in prometaphase , after the disruption of nuclear envelope the microtubules randomly may bind not only to each other , but also to the chromosomes . it has been demonstrated that the chromosomes by their kinetochore region move on the microtubules . this movement is a kind of sliding mediated by dynein motor protein . around the centrosome , the effect of a special unidentified force , referred as polar wind is noticed . it means that from the poles of the cell , all bigger particles are excluded , probably due to the mechanical effect of intensively growing microtubules . as they grow , they may push any particles , e.g . chromosomes . at the same time , the + ends of microtubules randomly growing from the two opposite poles may bind to the two different kinetochores of chromosomes . these microtubules are the kinetochore microtubules . in the metaphase , the chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane by the help of kinetochore microtubules . this arrangement is not static , the chromosomes are oscillating according to the dynamism of microtubules . at the same time , the length of microtubules is constant , because the rate of polymerization on both ends is the same . the third type of microtubules are the astral ones , they grow from the centrosome toward the plasma membrane . the role of them is not clear . metaphase-anaphase transition : in metaphase-anaphase transition , the anaphase promoting complex ( apc ) has to be activated . apc is a specific ubiquitin ligase , an enzyme which binds ubiquitin to its substrate proteins , targeting them to proteasomal degradation . one of the main substrates is the separase inhibitor , the securin . destruction of securin activates separase , which in turn , cleaves the sister chromatid binding cohesin from the chromosomes , allowing the pulling of sister chromatids to the poles by kinetochor microtubules . the other substrate is the b cyclin , and its degradation inactivates mpf . inactivation of mpf triggers the completion of m-phase ; disappearance of mitotic spindle , chromosome decondensation , reorganization of nuclear envelope and the cytokinesis , too . in the metaphase m ( spindle ) -checkpoint machinery operates ; briefly , its significance is to ensure the precise halving of chromosomes , pulling one sister chromatid to one pole and the other one to the other pole . the accurate segregation of sister chromatids is ensured by amphitelic attachment . if the attachment is not correct , the kinetochore microtubules are not bound to the sister chromatids of a chromosome from opposite poles , there are free kinetochores , the apc remains inactive and the mitosis is stopped in metaphase until the attachment is corrected . the colchicine causing disruption of microtubules stops the division in this way . if the chromosomes are arranged correctly in the metaphase , apc is activated and the cell may step the anaphase . in anaphase , two subphases are distinguished according to the type of microtubules operating . in anaphase a , the kinetochore microtubules shorten by depolymerization on both ends . the depolymerization is coupled to the movement of the chromosome , the sister chromatids are pulled to the opposite poles of the cell . the poles are further separated in anaphase b by the help of polar microtubules which are growing , but the overlapping region remains constant . consequently , the sister chromatids are further separated . cytokinesis : the division of cytoplasm is carried out by other components of the cytoskeleton than the separation of chromosomes , but the two cytoskeletal systems are not independent . the site of cytoplasmic cleavage is denoted by the mitotic spindle . asymmetric positioned mitotic spindle results in asymmetric cytokinesis , in different sized cells . in late anaphase ( anaphase b ) , after the migration of two sister chromatids to the poles beneath the plasma membrane , perpendicularly to the mitotic spindle axis , a contractile ring composed of actin and myosin ii filaments is formed . the regulation of contractile ring development is not exactly known , but the role of kinases and monomeric g-proteins is suspected . the sliding of actin and myosin filaments on each other eventually leads to the progressive cleavage of the cell . finally , below the contractile ring , the two cells are only connected by the so-called midbody . the new cell membranes develop by the fusion of vesicles , which transport probably takes place along the microtubules of midbody . operation of cell cycle checkpoints : the checkpoint machinery is composed of three main components which make up a cascade . the sensor detects the errors occurring in dna molecules , this signal is transmitted to a transducer , which finally triggers effector proteins . in g1 and g2 checkpoints , the dnadamages , for example the single-stranded dna , or double strand breaks are recognized by certain proteins which activate transducers . the activated transducers , which are protein kinases ( not cyclin dependent ) phosphorylate , e.g . in g1 checkpoint , the p53 protein . this phosphorylation stabilizes p53 and stops the cell cycle . so , in g1 checkpoint , the effector protein is p53 . in g2 checkpoint , cdc25 is the effector molecule . in the case of dna damage , the transducer inactivates cdc25 by phosphorylation , that is why the inactive cdc25 is not able to activate mpf by the cleavage of inactivation phosphate group , so the cell cycle is stopped before m-phase . in the m checkpoint , the sensor proteins bind to free kinetochores of chromosomes . however , these proteins recruit a protein which is required for the apc function , so in the case of free kinetochores apc is not functional ; the cell is retained in metaphase . obviously , the precise operation of checkpoint machinery is more complex than it has been described before ; the details are being discovered nowadays . anyway , its accurate function is essential to give rise to genetically identical cell by cell cycle . the failure of sufficient regulation or checkpoint machinery may result in atypical divisions . although some of these atypical divisions , depending on the species and cell type is not necessarily abnormal , but the majority of them is characteristic of tumor cells . of course , from each of atypical proliferation genetically diverse cells are originated . in endomitosis , the nuclear envelope remains intact , therefore , the amount of cellular dna content increases . in parallel with the size of the nucleus and the whole cell enlarges , too , so giant cells are formed . the sister chromatid separation inside the intact nuclear causes the increase in chromosome number of the cell , these are referred to as polyploid cells . if sister chromatids remain together , it leads to the formation of giant chromosomes ( polytene ) composed of many sister chromatids instead of two . failure of cytokinesis results in giant cells , too , but these cells have more nuclei . many division abnormalities are caused by the mitotic spindle defects . the normal division is bipolar due to the precise duplication and separation of centrosomes . abnormalities either in the duplication or the separation of centrosomes may cause so-called multipolar divisions , depending on the number of poles : tri- , tetra- , etc . polar divisions . the consequence of non-disjunction of sister chromatids of a chromosome can be easily calculated , it leads to the change of chromosome number ( aneuploidy ) in both cells , in one of them one more and in the other one less chromosome is found . the reason for such a defect is the syntelic or monotelic kinetochore - microtubule attachment . however , the merotelic attachment may result in bridge formation ( or anaphase bridge because it becomes visible in anaphase ) . first , the sister chromatid to which microtubules bind from both poles make a kind of bridge but later it more probably breaks . the breakage of chromosomes leads to structural chromosomal abnormalities . the chromosome fragment without centromere is excluded from the nucleus and makes a so-called micronucleus in the cytoplasm . this phenomenon is used in mutagenicity assays to detect compounds which cause/increase chromosomal breakages . chromosome territories : while chromosomes appear as condensed , elongated structures during the process of cell division , for most of the lifetime of a cell , chromosomes do not look anything like this . so , the question is what chromosomes look like in the nucleus of a cell between cell divisions ? it was the fish technique that has revealed how chromosomes look like during the interphase of the cell cycle . it turned out that among the several models suggested previously , the chromosome territory model proved to be the right one . although there are still a lot of open questions a few topics have already been clarified : chromosome territories are irregular in shape but typically about 1 to 2 micrometers in diameter , and they consist of smaller subdomains . chromosome territories border each other closely ; the neighboring chromosomes can invade the territories of each other and intermingle at their peripheries . chromosome territories are known to be arranged radially around the nucleus . chromosome territories are semiconserved from parent to daughter cell during cell division , with locations in the daughter cell similar to those in the parent cell . patterns of chromosome arrangement are specific to both cell type and tissue type . the organization of interphase chromosome territories changes during differentiation , quiescence , and senescence . the gene - rich chromosomes are present in the nuclear interior while gene - poor chromosomes are located at the periphery . regions of dna that are within the nuclear interior show higher transcriptional activity . group of genes with common tasks are in the vicinity of each other and are under coordinated regulation . loops may carry genes to even very remote sites in the nuclear space for coregulation in an expression hub . chromosome territories are also dynamic structures , with genes able to relocate from the periphery towards the interior once they have been switched on . in other cases , genes may move in the opposite direction , or simply maintain their position . chromosome territories can reposition in diseases , which might provide novel insights into disease mechanisms and why genes are incorrectly expressed in diseases . in summary , this functional compartmentalization of the chromosomes makes possible : coordinated functioning of the dna packed in the nucleus ; synchronized switching off and on of hundreds/thousands of genes coordinated functioning of genes working for common aims fine-tuning of the regulation of gene-gene interactions organized transportation of gene products separation of active genes from the inactive ones . inter- and intrachromosomal loops in the regulation of gene expression : loops may carry genes to remote sites in the nuclear space for coregulation in an expression hub . meiosis : there are two forms of genetic information transmission from one generation to the next one . firstly , asexual reproduction , which is typical for the lower organisms evolved . it is a simple process , the offspring develop from the somatic cells of a single parent , thus they are genetically identical to the parent organism . in sexual reproduction , the offspring have mixed genome of two parents , so they are genetically different from both parents and from each other . sexual reproduction has a great evolutionary advantage for the species , because the individuals gain high genetic variability allowing the adaptation to the unexpected circumstances . sexual reproduction is crucial for the survival of species . in sexually reproducing organisms , there are two successive generations of cells : the diploid somatic cells give rise to haploid cell by meiosis and the haploid cells , which are reduced to gametes in animals . the species-specific chromosome number is restored by the fusion of gametes resulting diploid zygote , and the life of a new individual starts . how these haploid cells are formed in meiosis ? the essence of the process is double : on one hand the chromosome number is halved , secondly the parental genetic information is mixed . phases of meiosis : in meiosis there are two successive divisions : meiosis I and meiosis ii . similarly to mitosis , in meiosis i , prophase the chromosomes are condensed , the nucleolus and the nuclear envelope disappear . the main event of this phase is the homologous recombination , the exchange of sequences of paired homologous chromosomes ( maternal and paternal chromosomes of the same size and shape and having the same genes ) . it is the longest phase of meiosis which is divided into five substages : leptotene , zygotene , pachytene , diplotene and diakinesis . in leptotene , the two sister chromatids ( having identical dna due to duplication in s-phase ) containing chromosomes are very thin fiber-like structures , which randomly bind by their both ends to the nuclear envelope . later , they move to a distinct point of nuclear envelope , close to centrosome , forming a bouquet-like structure . thus , the homologous chromosomes are close to each other , which is necessary for the next stage process . in zygotene , the pairing , also known as synapse , of homologous chromosomes begins . recent studies have shown that even before the pairing , probably in early leptotene the double stranded dna-s break at several hundred sites . the pairing of homologous chromosomes is helped by a ladder-like protein structure , by the synaptonemal complex . it has lateral , transversal filaments , the overlapping transversal filaments form the central region of the structure . structure of synaptonemal complex- it keeps together the homologous chromosomes ( bivalent , tetrads ) like a zip . due to dna condensation , chromosomes become thicker and more visible , and the synapses are completed in pachytene . after pairing , they form structures composed of two chromosomes , maternal and paternal one ( bivalent ) , both having two sister chromatids ( tetrad ) . the tight binding between the homologous chromosomes leads to apparent decrease in number of chromosomes ( pseudoreduction ) . the majority of double-stranded dna breaks are repaired , but at some of them homologous recombination ( crossing-over ) , exchange of corresponding chromatids occur . this process is mediated by the recombination nodules , large 100 nm sized multi-enzyme complexes , which appear on the synaptonemal complex . the detailed molecular mechanism of crossing over is not discussed here . the crossing over may occur between any chromatids , but it results new combination of genes if it happens between non-sisters . the number of crossing overs between non-sister chromatids of a chromosome pair is 1-3. there is compulsory recombination even between the basically not homologous x and chromosomes at their pseudoautosomal regions ( par ) . checkpoint machinery controls the appearance and the process of crossing over , underlining the significance of homologous recombin6ation . in diplotene stage the synaptonemal complex largely detaches , thus the members of homologous pairs may slightly mov e away from each other , so the chromosomes are linked only at the sites of crossing overs , referred as chiazmata . finally , in diakinesis the homologous separation continues , but the bivalents are still connected at chiazmata , found between sister chromatid s of homologous chromosomes , and also by aploid s which held together sister chromatids of a chromosome . later , the aploid s dissociate from the arms and keep the chromatids together only at centromeric regions . during the prophase , kinetochore region develops on chromosomes , but in contrast to mitosis , both kinetochores of a chromosome face one pole , while the kinetochore of the homologous face opposite -in first division metaphase , not the single chromosomes , but the chromosome pairs are arranged in the equatorial plane , whereas the chiazmata still connect the homologs . chiazmata only disappear at the end of metaphase . -in the anaphase the kinetochore microtubules pull the homologous chromosomes and not the chromatids toward the poles , since the kinetochores of a chromosome face the same pole . thus , the synapses not only allow the cross-over , but also needed to halve the number of chromosomes . the separation of homologous , which member of a pair is pulled to a given pole is a random process . it increases further the genetic variation . in human it is 2^23 . in telophase , the nuclear membrane is reorganized , and the cytoplasm splits . arising cells are haploid , that is why the first division of meiosis is called reduction division . the chromosomes are still composed of two sister chromatids , which will separate in the following part , in meiosis ii . the first division is followed by a short interphase , in which there is no dna replication . second division of meiosis is also divided into pro- , meta- , ana- , and telophase , but these phases are essentially very similar to the phases of mitosis . thus , in metaphase the single chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane , and in the anaphase , the sister chromatids of the chromosomes are separated . the orientation of kinetochores is also similar to mitosis . in the telophase , the nuclear envelopes are reorganized , two nuclei are formed and then the cytoplasms are also halved . finally , the meiosis results from a diploid cell four haploid cells , the gametes . after the fusion of two haploid cells , in the zygote chromosome number of the species is reconstituted . at the same time , the genetic information of the gametes is different caused by the homologous recombination in meiosis i prophase and the random assortment of homologous in meiosis i anaphase . these processes provide high genetic variability needed for the survival of the species . the most frequent abnormality of meiosis is the non-disjunction either in meiosis i or ii . obviously , non-disjunction of both the homologous chromosomes ( in the first division ) , and the sister chromatids ( in the second division ) alters the chromosome number of resulting gametes . involvement of such gametes in fertilization may lead to so-called aneuploid genome mutation in vertebrates , the gamete formation is a complex process , the meiosis is only a part of it . at the very beginning of ontogeny primordial germ cells migrate to the developing gonads . several mitotic divisions are followed by meiosis , and finally in male gametogenesis a differentiation step gives rise to mature gametes . oogenesis : in most animals , the female gamete ( egg ) is very large compared to somatic cells . eggs contain yolk : different nutrients ( lipids , proteins , carbohydrates ) sufficient for the early development of embryo , until self-feeding will be able . although the egg of mammals contains small amount of yolk ( oligolecithal ) , it is much bigger than the body cells of the organism . the size of a human egg is about 100 m. in developing gonads of embryo the primordial germ cells ( 46 chromosomes ) develop to oogonia ( 46 chromosomes ) which divide by mitosis . the cell entering the first meiotic division is primary oocyte ( 46 chromosomes ) . meiosis i is halted , the cells may remain in prophase diplotene stage for decades . meanwhile , a coat , the zona pellucida develops around them , and in the cytoplasm cortical granules accumulate , which content is released after the sperm penetration , preventing the penetration of further sperms . from the puberty due to hormonal effects , cyclically one cell resumes meiosis i. division of the cytoplasm is asymmetric , the larger cell is the secondary oocyte ( 23 chromosomes ) , whereas the smaller cell is polocyte ( or polar cell , also has 23 chromosomes ) . the unequal cytokinesis is likely provided by the asymmetric mitotic spindle position . secondary oocyte continues meiosis , enters meiosis ii but it is halted in the metaphase . secondary oocyte is ovulated in this stage . the completion of meiosis ii is triggered by the penetration of sperm , the fertilization . the meiosis ii results a fertilized ovum which contains two pronuclei ( 23-23 chromosomes ) and a polocyte ( 23 chromosomes ) . the polocyte derived from the first divison may divide , too , but the studies usually demonstrate the presence of only two polocytes . polocyte : derived from the first division is termed primary , the other derived from the second division is termed secondary polocyte . spermatogenes is while in most species the egg is the largest cell , not capable of independent movement , the other gamete , the sperm is the smallest cell and is able to move . in male organism , primordial germ cells ( 46 chromosomes ) migrate into developing testis where they become spermatogonia ( 46 chromosomes ) in the external wall of testis . from the puberty , spermatogonia divide continuously by mitosis . a group of them enters meiosis i ; these are the primary spermatocytes ( 46 chromosomes ) . meiosis i gives rise to two haploid cells , called secondary spermatocytes ( 23 chromosomes ) . the second meiotic division makes for haploid round , immobilized cells , called spermatids ( 23 chromosomes ) . in both divisions , the cytokinesis is incomplete , the secondary spermatocytes and spermatids , too , are connected to each other by cytoplasmic bridge . after meiosis differentiation process , cytological morphogenesis begins , which results in actively motile sperms . this step is called spermiohistogenesis , which happens embedded in sertol i cells . from sertoli cells , the sperms are placed in the lumen of testis . the typical structure of differentiated sperms ( head , midpiece and tail part ) serves only one purpose , to safely convey dna content to the egg . the head contains the nucleus where dna is in completely heterochromatic form to occupy the smallest space . protamines being more positively charged proteins than histones are needed for dna to be packed so condense . in front of the nucleus , a giant secretory vesicle , acrosome is located . the acrosome vesicle containing hydrolytic enzymes is responsible for dissolving the different coats of eggs during fertilization . in the midpiece fused mitochondria are located , forming so-called mitochondrial sheath , where atp necessary for the movements of the sperm is produced . the tail essentially is a flagellum composed of 9x2+2 microtubule system , additionally at the periphery there are nine dense keratin containing fibrils whose function is still not clear . recent studies have demonstrated the differences of spermatogenesis or oogenesis regarding the meiosis i prophase . regulation of meiosis : the regulation of meiotic division has primarily been studied in amphibian and fish oogenesis . firstly , mpf itself has been found to be the regulator of amphibian oogenesis , and only later was discovered that it was equal to m-phase or mitosis triggering factor ( mpf ) , which is composed of cdk1 and cyclin b. there are crucial differences in the process of oogenesis and spermatogenesis , consequently in the regulation , too . the first difference is the start time of meiosis . the oogenesis begins in early embryonic life , the spermatogenesis in puberty . it has been demonstrated that retinoic acid is responsible for meiotic trigger . retinoic acid that is spermatogenesis oogenesis initialization of the process during life puberty second month of the embryonic life halted in the diplotene stage of meiosis i in the fifth month rhythm of the process continuous , without interruption cyclic from the puberty : monthly one oocyte pro ovum continues meiosis , enters meiosis ii but it is halted in the metaphase , completion of meiosis ii is triggered by the fertilization time required for gamete formation 60-65 days even 50 years . from the beginning of the fifth month of the embryonic life , the homologues in the primary oocytes are held together at the chiasmata , effectiveness of the regulatory mechanism elimination of faulty spermatocytes by effective meiotic checkpoint control system the checkpoint control system of the meiotic spindle formation is less effective leading to an increased risk of nondisjunction and aneuploidies result of gametogenesis 4 equivalent sperms one oocyte+2 polocytes cell number at fertilization 15-150 million sperms/ ejaculation one ( two ) oocyte ( s ) /month termination of the process during life continues for a lifetime terminates at menopause metabolized by cyp26b1 is produced in both sexes embryo . since the amount and the activity of cyp26b1 is higher in male than in female embryo , retinoic acid is degraded in males , but in females as a signal induces the expression and effect of stra8 transcriptional factor . in oogonia stra8 triggers the meiosis . the meiosis i starts but stops in prophase diplotene stage . the elevation of camp has been detected in primary oocyte , which in turn inactivates mpf via protein kinase a. from puberty camp decreases cyclically in a primary oocyte , indirectly activating mpf , needed to continue meiosis i. the second arrest of the meiosis is in the metaphase of meiosis ii . the role of a not precisely identified protein , called cytostatic factor ( cfs ) is assumed . it is under the regulation of mos protooncogene ( serine/threonine kinase ) and inhibits apc activity via mapk pathway . in the case fertilization the ca ion level is elevated that is needed for the reactivation of apc . the activated apc induces the degradation of b cyclin and securin in the proteasome . the not inhibited separase may separate cohesin from the centromeres of chromosomes , allowing the sister chromatid separation in anaphase . lack of b cyclin inactivates mpf and the cell , which is already the zygote , may complete the division . then , the zygote starts segmentation ( cleavage ) which is characterized by a special , so-called embryonic cell cycle . in embryonic cell cycle there is no g1 and g2 , consequently cell growth , the cell size gradually decreases . embryonic cell cycle is regulated by the same mpf , which controlled the meiosis . genetic variations : mutation and polymorphism- according to the classic definition , mutations are sudden heritable changes in the dna . the process ( change ) itself is still called mutation , but due to the fast development of genetics and genomics , two terms related to the variations in the sequence had to be modified . next to the above-mentioned definition the term mutation is also used to indicate a disease-causing change or sometimes rare change . similarly , the term polymorphism is used both to indicate a non-disease-causing change , or a change found at a frequency of 1 % or higher in the population . in the era of advanced dna sequencing tools and personal genomics , these earlier definitions of mutation and polymorphism are antiquated . the 1 % or higher frequency associated with a polymorphism is an arbitrary number and in addition , there are examples that variations with > 1 % frequencies can cause diseases . for instance , sickle-cell anemia is caused by a nucleotide change whose frequency is > 1 % in a gene coding for the beta chain of the hemoglobin protein . the disease manifests in people who have two copies of the mutated gene . to prevent this confusion , a new usage of these terms is suggested . it is proposed that in most cases , instead of mutation and polymorphism neutral terms like `` sequence variant `` , `` alteration `` and `` allelic variant `` should be used . the term mutation may be used to indicate the result of a recent mutation event which has been detected using as a reference the germline dna of the same individual . therefore , a mutation would be a dna variant acquired over the lifetime of an organism , i.e . a somatic mutation . in this sense , mutations are the principal causes of many diseases like cancer but are typically not inherited by their offspring . alterations in the dna of germ cells sperms and eggs can be inherited by offspring and are currently called germline mutations . in this case , the term mutation should be used only if the germline variant has been detected using as a reference the germline dna of the same individual . in the case , a sequencing project did not include as a reference the germ-line dna of an individual , the term mutation could not be used and should be replaced by the neutral term variant . therefore , in the sequencing report the alternative use of the term mutation or variant will also clarify which kind of reference was adopted . importantly , the term polymorphism should only be used in the context of a population . accordingly , this term can not be approved to classify variants in personal genomics . the classification of mutations : to evaluate mutations , it is crucial to know where , in what cell types they occur . somatic mutation is formed in a given somatic cell , and when this cell divides successively the mutation is transmitted to the offspring , so a mutation carrying cell clone is formed . depending on the time of the mutation , whether it is formed earlier or later in ontogeny , the number of cells involved , and the size of mutant clones will differ . a classic example of somatic mutations when one of the eyes is blue , the other is brown . then the mutation occurred after the separation of the eye primordium . the other situation is when brown spots can be seen in a blue eye ; in this case the mutation took place after the development of the two separate eyes . somatic mutations in natural conditions-except the vegetative propagation of plants-are not passed on to offspring . however , the medical significance is not negligible , since somatic mutations may also play a role in tumorigenicity . according to knudson 's hypothesis ( two hit theory ) for the development of certain cancers affecting tumor suppressor genes , two successive mutations are required . the tumor suppressor gene mutations are recessive , so two mutant copies are necessary for the complete loss of function , and then the tumor formation . one is usually inherited , while other is formed only in one or certain organs such the previous heterozygous state is lost and the homozygosity of the mutant tumor suppressor gene leads to tumor formation . the phenomenon is called loss of heterozygosity=loh , and by using modern molecular biological methods , it may be suitable for the detection of pre-cancerous conditions . germline mutations occurring in primordial germ cells or in germ cells during gametogenesis are inherited to the offspring , and therefore they have crucial importance in medicine . according to their origin there are spontaneous , due to defective dna replication , and induced mutations caused by various environmental effects ( radiation , chemicals , etc . ) . the mutation frequency depends on the evolutionary level , since in prokaryotes in the absence of dna repair the mutation rate is much higher than eukaryotes . accordingly , high mutation frequency was observed in mitochondria with its prokaryotic-like dna . this is about ten times ( ! ) higher than the mutation rate of the nuclear dna , which is about 10-5 per gene per generation . the most frequent spontaneous mutations are : 1/deaminations or 2/depurinations 1/ during deamination cytosine is converted to uracil , and adenine to hypoxanthine ; 2/ during depurination the sugar-phosphate backbone of dna remains intact , but the purine base , e.g . guanine is lost , so it will be a toothless dna , so a gap is formed in the dna strand . the frequency of spontaneous mutations is influenced by the cell or tissue type , rapidly proliferating cells and tissues carry more spontaneous mutations , as the higher the rate of dna duplication , the greater the chance of erroneous incorporation of nucleotides . the best-known induced mutation is the uv radiation-induced one . the uv radiation induces dimerization of thymine , this distorts the dna , interferes with dna replication and transcription . similarly , incorporation of certain base analogues as 5 bromodeoxyuridine ( brd u ) during dna replication and the subsequent incorrect dna repair , results in a change in the original sequence . alkylating compounds ( ems=ethyl-methane-sulfonate , mnu=methyl-nitroso-urea ) attaches ethyl or methyl groups to certain dna bases like guanine , and thus o6-methylguanine arises . this causes mutation because o6-methylguanine pairs thymine instead of cytosine , therefore following the methylation of dna bases in the subsequent replication another base will be incorporated into the newly synthesized strand , so the mutation is fixed . intercalating compounds ( proflavin , acridine orange ) either merge in to the dna strand between bases , or create dna loops which in future replication and repair processes will lead to shorter dna ( deletion ) or to dna lengthening ( duplication ) . some carcinogens ( e.g . benzo ( a ) pyrene ) connects larger molecules to the dna , so-called adducts are created . the mutations were also classified according to the degree of change caused in the dna . thus , we can talk about gene mutation- this is sometimes called point mutation , chromosome mutation when the lesion involves several genes , and genome mutation , which can affect the entire genetic material . gene mutations gene mutations can affect a single base of a gene- this is called point mutation in narrow sense- and may affect a greater or lesser portion of the gene . a single base limited mutation can be addition , deletion , or base substitution . if the number of bases added or deleted is not equal to three or a whole number multiple of it ( 6 , 9 , 12 etc . ) , a so-called frame-shift mutation is created . this means that downstream from the mutation site the transcriptional reading of the coded information is changed . if 3 or 6 , 9 , etc . is the number of bases inserted or eliminated , so in frame mutation occurs , only the affected section of information content changes the rest of the genes does not . there are two additional opportunities in base substitution , the transition and the transversion . in the first case a purine is replaced by another purine base or a pyrimidine base by another pyrimidine e.g . a- > g or c- > t . in the latter case , a purine base is exchanged by a pyrimidine base or vice versa a pyrimidine by a purine . the effects of substitution mutations are more varied . there is missense , nonsense and silent or sense mutations . following a missense mutation , the codon changes , and thus a different amino acid is incorporated into the protein , e.g . the mutation causing sickle cell anemia , wherein base exchange results in the incorporation of valine in place of glutamine as 6th amino acid in b-globin chain of hemoglobin . due to a nonsense mutation , the original codon changes to stop codon , so early termination of the protein chain , and a shorter protein molecule will be the result . in the case of silent or sense mutation due to degenerated genetic code , although the codon changes , the same amino acid is incorporated into a protein , so the mutation has no consequences . this mainly occurs when the 3rd and 2nd base of the codon is replaced by another one . whereas , during a cell 's life dna replicates several times and may be repeatedly exposed to mutagenic agents several- even different types- mutations may occur . some of the recurrent mutations affect the part is already mutated , restoring the original sequence . then a so-called back or reverse mutation takes pace , and thus the potentially harmful consequences of the first mutation are eliminated . there is another possibility to apparently eliminate the consequence of a mutation . in prokaryotes , it has been observed that although the dna mutated , different amino acid was not built into the protein . it turned out that in this case trna also mutated and yet it delivered the original amino acid to the altered m rna codon . such trna is called suppressor trna . if the mutation affected an extended sequence ( any number of bases ) in the gene , then gene deletion , addition , or when the given sequence is reversed , gene inversion takes place . longer deletions may also affect not only one gene , but either gene families , ( where genes with similar but not identical function , derived from an ancestral gene , are located directly one after the other in the dna ) . such is the case of deletions affecting globin gene families in various hemoglobin disorders ( hemoglobinopathies ) , for example in thalassemias ( its mutation mechanism is discussed at mutation hot spots ) . of course , the longer the lesion , the more severe the consequences , that is the more wrong , altered or functionless the protein product as well . a special case of gene mutations , namely the additions is , when alu sequences or line elements are integrated into the coding region of a gene by transposition or retrotransposition . then the addition of the jumping element ( transposon or retroposon ) breaks the original exon sequence , and thus leads to rna and protein formation of altered information content . in the case of hemophilia a addition of an alu sequence causes the disease . similarly , gene duplication due to recombination results in mutation as well . it occurs either in meiosis , when unequal crossing over between non-sister chromatids leads to gene duplication , or in mitosis , when rarely mitotic recombination ( crossing-over ) takes place between sister chromatids . in the latter case , it is a somatic mutation , and may lead to tumorigenesis by creating such daughter cells , where in one of them the heterozygosity is lost . ( in the other daughter cell three copies of the gene are present , where gene duplication is in one of the homologous chromosomes while the other homologue is with a single locus of the given gene ) . the so-called mutational hot spots should be mentioned here . individual dna sequences , genes more likely mutate , where repetitive sequences are found . these repeats may interfere with the replication and meiotic pairing of the homologous chromosomes . the replication abnormality has physical causes : symmetrical or repetitive sequences located on the same strand of unwound dna can pair on the basis of complementarity or can form loops , and thus disturb the function of enzymes involved in replication and repair . for example , in hemophilia b , where large direct sequences with cg repeats occur in the factor ix . coding gene , there are 10 to 100 times more mutations . this higher mutation frequency may be attributable to epigenetic causes as well . methylated cytosine easily deaminates to thymine , thus leading to a ct transition on one strand and a ga transition on the other . the above-mentioned uneven crossing ( see chapter 4 , cytogenetics ) can explain the repetition of larger sequences , sometimes of entire genes . for this phenomenon , a good example is the formation of- thalassemia . normally , both homologs of chromosome 16 contain two-globin genes one after the other . the uneven crossing over can result in gametes , which for example contain 1 , or 3-globin genes . following the fertilization of such zygotes may be formed in which one more or one less-globin genes are present . the person 's health depends on the number of-globin genes : 0 copy- intrauterine lethality , 1 copy- severe anemia , 2 copies- mild anemia , three copies- asymptomatic carrier can be the consequence . today , more than 30 diseases are known , which are caused by uneven crossing over ( e.g . red-green color blindness ) . not only the direct repeats , but palindromic sequences ( sequences of which base sequence in 5'-3 ' direction is the same on both strands ) can frequently lead to additions and deletions . a special type of gene mutations are the repeat mutations where different numbers of nucleotides are repeated forming so called repetitive units . beside the best known trinucleotide repeat mutations there are other length mutations involving up to 24 nucleotides long units , thus resulting in the accumulation of e.g . octapeptide units in the protein ( creutzfeldt-jakob disease ) . several types of trinucleotide repeat mutations are known . polyglutamine diseases associated with the expansion of cag triplets ( cag is the code of glutamine ) . the currently known cag trinucleotide repeat mutations results in severe neurological diseases , so-called neurodegenerative disorders , but numbers of disease-causing repeats are different . in the case of huntington 's chorea and kennedy disease , repeats affect the protein coding region of the gene . another large group of known trinucleotide repeat mutations are the polyalanine diseases in which gcn triplets ( n can be any nucleotide ) are accumulated , causing alanine accumulation in the protein . they are mainly transcription factor affecting mutations which generally lead to developmental malformation syndromes such as synpolydactylia or hand-food-genital syndrome . while the aforementioned trinucleotide repeats are in the coding regions of the genes , in the case of myotonic muscular dystrophy and fragile x syndrome , the repeats are in the untranslated region = utr , and generally the number of repeats is larger as well . it is typical for the repeat mutations that the diseases are caused only above a certain number of repeats , so there is a so-called premutation state , and that the repeat expansion ( the increase in the repeat number ) takes place during meiosis . the increase in the number of repeats ( e.g . cag ) is the result of a process ( already mentioned at the mutation hot spots ) , when during the replication one of the dna strands is looped due to the repetitive sequences . if this looping affects the newly synthetized strand , the replication apparatus can detect it as if the replication had not been completely carried out from the template strand , so more repeat units are added to the new strand . this phenomenon is called replication skipping . with this the new strand contains several new repeat units as well . the old and the new strands are different in length , and then the repair mechanism corrects it by adding a sufficient number of new repeats to the old strand . the opposite phenomenon also exists- that may decrease the number of repeats . in this case looping affects the template strand , i.e . the newly synthetized strand will be shorter than the original was . however , in this case the repair will correct the error , too , i.e . the unnecessary number of repeats will be cut out from the old strand , so eventually there will be a dna molecule containing fewer repeat units . since dna replication takes place before mitosis and meiosis and , in principle , the repeat number can change in both cases . in contrast , in the case of gcn trinucleotide repeats the change in the repeat number is rather explained by a meiotic event namely by uneven crossing over . since the number of repeats varies from generation to generation , the repeat mutations are not stable and therefore they are recently also called dynamic mutations . in the case of prokaryotes , this dynamism has an important role in counteracting with the effects of the host 's immune system ; in eukaryotes , it may play a role in tumorigenicity . the role of repeat mutations that cause disease is easy to see , since with the addition of increased number of repeats into the coding sequence , with this expansion , the structure of the gene involved will be more and more distorted , therefore the protein is coded by it becomes more and more altered and no n-functioning . there is a phenomenon called anticipation- long been known in human genetics but can not be explained for a long time . anticipation means that a hereditary disease transmitted from generation to generation will appear in younger and younger age and in more and more severe form . since the repeat expansions of medical importance takes place especially in meiosis ( or in the previous s phase ) , and the gene in question will be increasingly damaged by this process , the above-mentioned phenomenon is well explained . in case of gene mutations , not only the size of the mutation , the length of the dna sequence in question is important , but in eukaryotes , including humans the place of mutation is important as well . it is not all the same whether a mutation is in a coding or non-coding region or in an untranslated region , in an exon or an intron , or even in the border between them . in the latter case , so-called splicing mutations can be formed , because the exon-intron boundary sequences play an important role in the intron looping , in the lariat format ion thereby , in spliceosome function . as a consequence of splicing mutations an exon is lost , or an intron can be translated , and a definitely defective protein will be the end result . even mutations of a single gene , which occur at various places , or base exchanges or splicing mutations can cause symptoms of completely different diseases , or symptoms of different severity as it is known for a large number of mutations in cystic fibrosis . the role of the utr mutations had not been understood till the past few years , since at first glance we might think that a mutation affecting the non - coding dna sequences only , and therefore no defective protein had been produced , could not cause symptoms or disease . in contrast , we now know that the 5 ' utr region of the mrna is required for ribosome binding , and normal protein synthesis . thus , it was also understood that some of the trinucleotide repeat mutations in which the expansion affects the utr region why cause diseases . moreover , the methylation of cytosines in a number of repeats induces epigenetic alterations ( attachment of methyl-binding proteins and/or non-coding rnas , chromatin remodeling ) , which also explains the role of the utr mutations in disease . although as a result of the human genome project the human dna sequence is almost completely known , but knowing the sequence does not imply the identification of the gene and knowing the gene does not automatically mean the understanding of its function . this is particularly problematic in those cases where the mutation results in a new protein with different functions , but neither the original protein nor the mutation itself is known . these are the so-called gain of function mutations . it makes the genetic analysis more difficult . it is typical for huntington disease , where the exact original function of the finally identified huntington protein is still not well understood . the situation is simpler when a mutation changes the structure or the function of a previously known protein . then loss-of-function mutations are present like in the case of phenylketonuria or sickle cell anemia . these loss-of-function mutations are usually recessive , so they manifest in the phenotype only in homozygous form . this may be so because for most of the gene products the exact quantity is not crucial , and the system works correctly with half dose as well . however , there are dose-sensitive genes , where 50 % of the product is not enough . this is called haploinsufficiency ( haplo=single ; insufficient=failure ) . so , the phenotype is abnormal even in heterozygotes , therefore dominant inheritance is typical for loss-of-function mutations . it also occurs that , due to the mutation , not only the original function of the gene product is lost , but the mutant product prevents normal function of the normal product , e.g . they can not dimerize . this is called dominant-negative effect , when the mutation is associated with dominant phenotype and is also expressed in heterozygous form . dna repair : if the dna or the genes themselves can mutate in so many ways , it is not surprising that a number of mechanisms developed during evolution to ensure the integrity of the genetic material that protect against mutations and to correct the resulting errors . the name for these mechanisms is dna repair . these mechanisms are grouped according to 1/ whether it reverses the chemical reaction that causes mutation ; it is the direct repair , or 2/ it cuts out the incorrect bases and replaces by correct ones ; it is known as excision repair . 1/ the best example of the direct repair is the removal uv-induced thymine dimers . photoreactivation is a process typical mainly for prokaryotes and for some eukaryotes ( e.g . yeast ) . in this process , the cyclobutane ring formed between the pyrimidine bases are slit by the use of visible light energy , and the bases remain in their original location , and the previous structure is restored . although uv radiation is one of the most mutagenic effects ( just think about the growing ozone hole and the intensive uv radiation exposure over earth 's surface ) , unfortunately , many species , including humans are not capable of this photoreactivation repair . another direct repair mechanism is the removal of alkylated bases . the o6-methylguanine methyltransferase enzyme removes the methyl group of guanine by linking it to a cysteine base in its active site . such enzymes are found both in pro- and eukaryotes . 2/ the excision repair is more common than the direct repair . there are three types : a/ base excision , b/ nucleotide excision , c/ mismatch repair , a/ during the base excision repair the single incorrectly incorporated base is spliced out and the dna polymerase fills the gap by using the intact complementary strand as a template . b/ in nucleotide excision , repair not only the mutated part e.g . thymine dimer is cleaved off , but also the preceding and following few other nucleotides , i.e . a shorter oligonucleotide sequence . then , the dna polymerase fills the gap based on the undamaged complementary strand , and dna ligase connects the old and the repaired section . for this process in humans , seven different genes are required and mutations in any of them are associated with uncorrected uv radiation-induced mutations . it is typical for rare inherited disorders , such as the cockayne syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum . the latter disease is a good example of genetic heterogeneity , since the errors of different excision repair enzymes result in the same symptoms . c/ during mismatch repair not exactly complementary bases that not exactly fit to the double helix are recognized and removed . during dna replication- in parallel with the synthesis-mismatched bases are detected and removed by the proof-reading ( 3 ' 5 ' exonuclease ) activity of the dna polymerase enzyme . those that escape this process are corrected by the enzymes of the mismatch repair complex . while bacterial mismatch repair is relatively well , human one is less known . however , we know that the common hereditary colon cancer is caused by mutations in some genes of the mismatch repair protein complex . so not only mutations in a specific protein coding gene , but any molecular defects in the repair mechanism can also lead to disease . both the direct and the excision repair take place before dna replication , ensuring that only the correct dna molecules replication is possible . however , the cells have multiple insurance , so there are two additional , alternative , post-replication repair mechanism s in case of the failure of the first two repair processes . one of them is the recombination repair , the other is the so called error-prone or sos repair . during the recombination repair the mutation remains uncorrected- for example a thymine dimer inhibits dna synthesis , so there will be a gap in the right place in the new strand . ( the synthesis is not interrupted completely because the dna polymerase- as in the case of okazaki fragments can synthesize a new strand in pieces ) . the gap is filled after recombining with the original strand , while the gap of the original strand derived from the previous recombination is filled by dna polymerase and ligase enzymes in cooperation . this late repair mechanism makes the correction of a mutation possible before the next dna replication . the sos or error-prone repair is known only in prokaryotes ( although similar mechanisms are assumed in eukaryote s as well ) , and it works only in extreme cases where cell survival is at stake . when much of the dna is damaged by strong radiation or other mutagenic agents , there is no time for the precise yet time-consuming repair mechanisms mentioned above , but to correct the dna damage quickly and inaccurately , thus avoiding the immediate cell death . it is obvious that such a mechanism in multicellular eukaryotes is not necessary , since the death of a single cell does not lead to the death of the whole organism , the other cells will take over the function of the lost cell . the most difficult is to correct those mutations which are usually caused by ionizing radiation or oxidative damage resulting double-stranded dna breaks , since then- in contrast to the previously mentioned repair mechanisms- there is no template strand serving as the basis of correction . the double-stranded breaks- given that free ends are generated- increase chromosome instability and thus can lead to structural chromosomal abnormalities . there are two mechanisms to correct them : a/ the so-called non-homologous end joining ( nhej ) b/ the homologous recombination in nhej , a special dna ligase with a cofactor brings the broken ends together . if the double-stranded break creates fragments with overhanging strands and microhomologous sequences then the repair is most likely correct . if the fragments have blunt ends , then there is a high chance to unite not related pieces and generate structural chromosome abnormality as well . for error correction homologous recombination repair uses either the correct sequence of the homologous chromosome , or in g2 phase of the cell cycle the sister chromatid already formed as template by an enzyme system similar to that used in the crossing over . of course , not only various mechanisms for repair are available to protect genome integrity , but inactivation systems as well which can neutralize or inactivate mutagenic agents . such as the peroxisomal system in which the oxidative and thus mutagenic superoxides are eliminated by superoxide dismutase that converts peroxides h2 o2 , then catalase cleaves and thus neutralizes it . mutagenicity tests : to avoid the adverse effect of mutations , however , we can not rely exclusively on cells with evolutionarily integrated repair mechanisms , but everything possible must be done to prevent the production and the marketing materials of any mutagenic effect . this is the aim of the mutagenicity tests . according to international regulations , all prospective medicines and chemicals are subjects to the so-called pharmacological safety studies including different types of the mutagenicity tests . it is important that the widest possible spectrum of-from prokaryotes to eukaryotes , including mammals and human- in vivo or in vitro tests be carried out to eliminate the mutagenicity , the mutation- inducing effects . generally , to detect point mutations bacterial direct tests such as the ames test are the first , when the test material is directly administered to the appropriate culture of bacterial strains . however , it is also possible that not the test substance itself , but one of its metabolites is mutagenic , in this case mammalian liver microsome fraction containing enzymes necessary for the metabolism is also added to the experimental system . mutagenicity tests not only for the detection of point mutations but for the detection of mutations affecting dna repair and causing numerical and structural chromosome aberrations are also available . genetics in diabetes : type diabetes and related traits , the past decade has seen unprecedented progress in the understanding of the genetic basis of type2 diabetes ( t2 d ) , fueled largely by technological advancement . this has led to large scale studies such as various genome wide association studies ( gwas ) . gene discovery efforts for type 2 diabetes touching upon gwas studies in t2d which led to the identification of around 70 genomic loci . even in the absence of mechanistic understanding gwas signal , patterns still provide insights into disease pathogenesis . the variants associated with t2d have been predominantly through insulin secretion rather than peripheral insulin sensitivity . a similar case is presented in traits such as obesity and body mass index ( bmi ) . that these genetic variants have a physiological and pathological role is evident . gwas data have shown that physiological variation in fasting glucose levels does not overlap with those implicated in pathological deterioration of glycaemic control often . this has been explained by the authors through magic ( the metaanalyses of glucose and insulin related traits consortium ) study . fine mapping of t2d susceptibility loci : a range of approaches for assaying genetic variation across complex human traits loci and the methodologies for fine mapping causal variants in these regions have been delineated . the genetic architecture and pathophysiological mechanisms underpinning the diseases , fine mapping of loci is very important . the advent of next generation sequencing ( ngs ) has stepped up the tempo for discovery and interrogation of the full catalogue of human genetic variation . unlike the sanger sequencing , ngs could generate a huge amount of data . gwas studies of glycaemic traits , posing first , the question on glycaemic traits and then answering that disease subclassification is possible through glycaemic traits which are highly regulated within each individual and that the identification of genetic loci that influence glycaemic traits is an avenue to understand this . international collaborative efforts are the best way to generate massive data to understand the genetic underpinning of t2d . obesity and related traits touching upon the genetic architecture of obesity traits such as whr , bmi and also stressing the need for in vitro experiments and experiments on model organisms to elucidate the biological mechanism of obesity . gene discovery efforts for monogenic disorders of cell dysfunction and insulin resistance . while t2d is affected by a combination of genes and environment , monogenic forms of t2 dare more genetically enriched . the advent of ngshas helped in the diagnosis of monogenic diabetes and also in the discovery of novel aetiologies . the application of targeted ngs for clinical diagnostic testing or screening of known genes and exome analysis for novel gene discovery . the strategy for discovery and diagnosis of gene variants in neonatal diabetes and mody ( maturity onset diabetes of the young ) , has been detailed . the importance of genetic testing and treatment changes due to mutations in genes with high translational potential is also emphasized . omics of t2d and related traits , the new field of epigenetic modifications in t2d is reviewed well . transcriptome analysis serves as a tool for disease biology understanding is well accounted for . this is followed by genomics of adipose tissue and advancement in understanding of its role in obesity and its traits . the importance of continuing genetic , epigenetic and transcript data to understand the importance of gene variants discovered by gwas . a good account on the future directions of functional translation which will deliver to clinical medicine is also available . the advancements in the study of mouse models for understanding molecular mechanisms of diabetes and obesity . the fto gene has been identified as one of the obesities associated genes . whether it is possible to get the right drug at the right dose for the right person is a million-dollar question . the clinical impact of genetic diagnosis is discussed , taking mody as an example . the myriad clinical potentials of genomics , where patient stratification , prediction of risk of diabetes and its complications , therapeutic stratification and the discovery of novel therapeutic targets are possible . previous studies have examined individual dietary and lifestyle factors in relation to type 2 diabetes , but the combined effects of these factors are largely unknown . we followed 84,941 female nurses from 1980 to 1996 ; these women were free of diagnosed cardiovascular disease , diabetes , and cancer at base line . information about their diet and lifestyle was updated periodically . a low-risk group was defined according to a combination of five variables : a body mass index ( the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters ) of less than 25 ; a diet high in cereal fiber and polyunsaturated fat and low in trans-fat and glycemic load ( which reflects the effect of diet on the blood glucose level ) ; engagement in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity for at least half an hour per day ; no current smoking ; and the consumption of an average of at least half a drink of an alcoholic beverage per day . during 16 years of follow-up , we documented 3300 new cases of type 2 diabetes . overweight or obesity was the single most important predictor of diabetes . lack of exercise , a poor diet , current smoking , and abstinence from alcohol use were all associated with a significantly increased risk of diabetes , even after adjustment for the body-mass index . as compared with the rest of the cohort , women in the low-risk group ( 3.4 percent of the women ) had a relative risk of diabetes of 0.09 ( 95 percent confidence interval , 0.05 to 0.17 ) . a total of 91 percent of the cases of diabetes in this cohort ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 95 percent ) could be attributed to habits and forms of behavior that did not conform to the low-risk pattern . conclusions our findings support the hypothesis that the majority of cases of type 2 diabetes could be prevented by the adoption of a healthier lifestyle . several lifestyle factors affect the incidence of type 2 diabetes . obesity and weight gain dramatically increase the risk , and physical inactivity further elevates the risk , independently of obesity . cigarette smoking is associated with a small increase and moderate alcohol consumption with a decrease in the risk of diabetes . in addition , a low fiber diet with a high glycemic index has been associated with an increased risk of diabetes , and specific dietary fatty acids may differentially affect insulin resistance and the risk of diabetes . in most previous studies , dietary and lifestyle factors have been considered individually , although behavioral factors are typically correlated with one another . we therefore examined simultaneously a set of dietary and lifestyle factors in relation to the risk of type 2 diabetes and estimated the proportion of cases that could theoretically be avoided through the simultaneous adoption of multiple types of low-risk behavior . the nurses� health study began in 1976 , when 121,700 female nurses 30 to 55 years of age responded to a questionnaire regarding medical , lifestyle , and other health-related information.16 since then , questionnaires have been sent biennially to update this information and identify newly diagnosed cases of various diseases . diet was first assessed in 1980. for the current analysis , we excluded women with previously diagnosed diabetes , cancer , or cardiovascular diseases at base line and those who left more than 10 items blank on the 1980 dietary questionnaire or had implausibly low or high scores for total intake of food or energy ( less than 500 or more than 3500 kcal per day ) . after these exclusions , the analysis included 84,941 women . the follow-up rate with respect to the incidence of diabetes in the overall cohort was 97 percent of the total potential person-years of follow-up . the study was approved by the institutional review board of brigham and women�s hospital in boston ; completion of the self-administered questionnaire was considered to imply informed consent . assessment of diet : in 1980 , we assessed diet using a 61-item , semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire . an expanded dietary questionnaire including approximately 120 items was used to update the information about diet in 1984 , 1986 , and 1990. we asked how often , on average , a participant had consumed a particular amount of a specific type of food during the previous year . the intake of nutrients was computed by multiplying the frequency of consumption of each unit of food by its nutrient content . questions about the consumption of beer , wine , and liquor were included in each questionnaire . the reproducibility and validity of the food-frequency questionnaires have been described in detail previously . assessment of nondietary factors every two years , we update participants� smoking status ( never smoked , former smoker , or current smoker , including the number of cigarettes smoked per day ) , menopausal status and use or nonuse of postmenopausal hormone therapy , and body weight . reported weights have been highly correlated with measured weights ( r= 0.96 ) . the presence or absence of a family history of diabetes ( in first-degree relatives ) was assessed in 1982 and 1988. information about physical activity was first obtained in 1980 and was updated in 1982 , 1986 , 1988 , and 1992 with the use of a validated questionnaire . we estimated the amount of time per week spent in moderate-to-vigorous activities ( including brisk walking ) requiring the expenditure of 3 met or more per hour . definition of the low-risk group the criteria we used to define a low-risk group according to dietary and lifestyle variables were similar to those used in previous analyses of coronary disease . in terms of the body-mass index ( the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters ) , low risk was defined as a value of less than 25.0 , the standard cut off point for the classification of overweight . we did not include waist or hip circumferences in the analyses because they were first assessed in 1986 and because a high body-mass index was a much stronger predictor of diabetes in this cohort . in terms of physical activity , low risk was defined as an average of at least one half-hour per day of vigorous or moderate activity , including brisk walking , in keeping with published guidelines . in terms of cigarette smoking , low risk was defined as no current smoking , and in terms of alcohol use , low risk was defined as an average of 5g or more of alcohol per day ( about half a drink or more per day ) . because few women in this cohort drank heavily ( 1.2 percent reported drinking more than 45g of alcohol per day ) , we did not define an upper limit for alcohol consumption , although clearly such a limit would be necessary in order to establish public health guidelines . previous studies have found that a reduced risk of type 2 diabetes is associated with a higher intake of cereal fiber and polyunsaturated fat and that an increased risk is associated with a higher intake of trans fat ( formed during the partial hydrogenation of vegetable oils ) and a higher glycemic load ( which reflects the effect of diet on the blood glucose level ) . therefore , a low-risk diet was defined as a diet low in trans-fat and glycemic load and high in cereal fiber , with a high ratio of polyunsaturated to saturated fat . for each dietary factor , we assigned each woman a score between one and five , corresponding to her quintile of intake , with five representing the lowest-risk quintile , and summed her quintile values for the four nutrients . participants with composite dietary scores in the highest 40 percent among the women in the study were considered to be in the lowest risk category in terms of diet . ascertainment of cases of diabetes a supplementary questionnaire regarding symptoms , diagnostic tests , and hypoglycemic therapy was mailed to women who reported having received a diagnosis of diabetes . a case of diabetes was considered to be confirmed if at least one of the following was reported on the supplementary questionnaire : classic symptoms plus a plasma glucose concentration of at least 140 mg per deciliter ( 7.8 mmol per liter ) in the fasting state or a randomly measured plasma glucose concentration of at least 200 mg per deciliter ( 11.1 mmol per liter ) ; at least two elevated plasma glucose concentrations on different occasions ( a concentration of at least 140 mg per deciliter in the fasting state , a randomly measured concentration of at least 200 mg per deciliter , or a concentration of at least 200 mg per deciliter two or more hours after the initiation of oral glucose-tolerance testing ) in the absence of symptoms ; or treatment with hypoglycemic medication ( insulin or an oral hypoglycemic agent ) . our criteria for the classification of diabetes are consistent with those proposed by the national diabetes data group . the validity of this questionnaire has been verified in a subsample of our study population . the diagnostic criteria for type 2 diabetes changed in june 1996 , and a fasting glucose concentration of 126 mg per deciliter is now considered the threshold for a diagnosis of diabetes . we used the earlier criteria because all the cases in our cohort were diagnosed before june 1996. statistical analysis the duration of follow-up was calculated as the interval between the return of the 1980 questionnaire and the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes , death , or june 1 , 1996. relative risks were calculated by dividing the incidence of diabetes among women in the low-risk group by the incidence among the remaining women . to adjust for multiple risk factors , we used pooled logistic regression with two-year intervals , which is approximately equivalent to cox regression for time-dependent covariates . in all models , we simultaneously included terms for age , time ( eight periods ) , presence or absence of a family history of diabetes , menopausal status , and use or nonuse of postmenopausal hormone therapy . in the initial analyses , we calculated the relative risks and 95 percent confidence intervals for the different categories of each variable that was included in the low-risk profile , adjusting for age , time , presence or absence of a family history of diabetes , menopausal status , and use or nonuse of postmenopausal hormone therapy but not for the other components of the low-risk profile . we then examined the combined low-risk group , defined as women in the low-risk category for each variable , with all other women as the comparison group . we calculated the population attributable risk , an estimate of the percentage of cases of type 2 diabetes in this population that would theoretically not have occurred if all women had been in the low-risk group , assuming a causal relation between the risk factors and type 2 diabetes . we also conducted analyses stratified according to the presence or absence of a family history of diabetes and according to the body-mass index . within each stratum , we compared the women in the low-risk category with all the other women . to obtain the best estimate of long-term dietary intake and physical activity , we used the cumulative-update method , which takes the average of all previous data . for variables unrelated to diet and exercise , we used the most recent information ; the body-mass index and smoking status were updated every two years , and the information about alcohol intake was updated in 1984 , 1986 , and 1990. during 16 years of follow-up ( 1,301,055 person-years ) , we documented 3300 new cases of type 2 diabetes . the most important risk factor for type 2 diabetes was the body-mass index ; the relative risk of diabetes was 38.8 for women with a body-mass index of 35.0 or higher and 20.1 for women with a body-mass index of 30.0 to 34.9 , as compared with women who had a body-mass index of less than 23.0 even a body-mass index at the high end of the normal range ( 23.0 to 24.9 ) was associated with a substantially higher risk than a body-mass index of less than 23.0 ( relative risk , 2.67 ) . in this population , 61 percent of the cases of type 2 diabetes ( 95 percent confidence interval , 58 to 64 percent ) could be attributed to over weight ( defined as a body-mass index of 25 or higher ) . lack of exercise , a poor diet , current smoking , and abstinence from alcohol were all associated with a significantly increased risk of diabetes even after adjustment for the body-mass index . the inverse association between physical activity and the risk of diabetes was much stronger without body-mass index in the model ( the relative risk of diabetes for women who exercised for seven or more hours per week as compared with women who exercised for less than half an hour was 0.48 ; 95 percent confidence interval , 0.38 to 0.61 ) . analyses stratified according to the body-mass index showed that the associations between diabetes and diet , physical activity , smoking status , and alcohol use were generally similar among women with a normal body-mass index , those who were overweight , and those who were obese . further adjustment for the body-mass index as a continuous variable in each stratum did not substantially alter the results . in addition , the individual components of the dietary score were independently and significantly associated with the risk of diabetes when they were entered into the same model . estimates of the reduction in risk among women in the low-risk categories for three , four , or five of the modifiable risk factors . women who were in the low-risk categories for three factors ( body-mass index , diet , and exercise ) had a relative risk of diabetes of 0.12 ( 95 percent confidence interval , 0.08 to 0.16 ) as compared with all other women . the population attributable risk was 87 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 91 percent ) , suggesting that 87 percent of the new cases of diabetes in this cohort might have been prevented if all women had been in the low-risk group . the population attributable risk increased to 91 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 95 percent ) when the group included women in the low-risk categories for smoking status and alcohol consumption . only 3.4 percent of the women were in the low-risk group ( as defined in terms of all five risk factors ) . to address the possibility of surveillance bias , we conducted a sensitivity analysis restricted to the 2107 women for whom at least one symptom of diabetes was reported at the time diabetes was diagnosed ( 64 percent of the women with diabetes ) . in this sub group , the population attributable risk for the women in the low-risk group was 93 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 97 percent ) . to adjust for possible confounding by socioeconomic status , we conducted further analyses in which we controlled for the occupations of the women�s parents and the educational level of their husbands . the results did not materially change ; the population attributable risk for the women in the low-risk group was 90 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 81 to 95 percent ) . the reduction in risk associated with low risk as defined in terms of the five risk factors was similar for women with a family history of diabetes and for those without such a history and for white and nonwhite women ( approximately 3 percent of the cohort ) . among overweight women ( body-mass index , 25.0 to 29.9 ) and those with normal weight ( body-mass index , < 25.0 ) approximately half the cases of diabetes could have been prevented by the combination of a healthy diet , regular exercise , abstinence from smoking , and moderate alcohol consumption . among obese women ( body-mass index , = > 30.0 ) , a combination of a healthy diet and regular exercise was associated with a 24 percent reduction in the risk of diabetes . the addition of nonsmoking status and moderate alcohol consumption to the model increased the estimate of risk reduction somewhat but widened the confidence interval because of the small number of women with these characteristics . because a body-mass index at the high end of the normal range was associated with an increased risk of diabetes , we repeated the analysis using a body-mass index of 23.0 as the cutoff point . the population attributable risk for the low-risk group ( 2.3 percent of the cohort ) was 96 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 87 to 99 percent ) . in contrast , when we raised the body-mass�index cutoff point to 27.0 ( thereby including 4.1 percent of the cohort in the low-risk group ) , the population attributable risk for the low risk group was 88 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 80 to 93 percent ) . in this large cohort of middle-aged women , a combination of several lifestyle factors , including maintaining a body-mass index of 25 or lower , eating a diet high in cereal fiber and polyunsaturated fat and low in saturated and trans fats and glycemic load , exercising regularly , abstaining from smoking , and consuming alcohol moderately , was associated with an incidence of type 2 diabetes that was approximately 90 percent lower than that found among women without these factors . these results suggest that in this population the majority of cases of type 2 diabetes could be avoided by behavior modification . excess body fat is the single most important determinant of type 2 diabetes . weight control would be the most effective way to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes , but current strategies have not been very successful on a population basis , and the prevalence of obesity continues to increase . the public generally does not recognize the connection between overweight or obesity and diabetes . thus , greater efforts at education are needed . our data suggest that the percentage of cases of diabetes that are preventable by diet and exercise independently of body weight is greater among women of normal weight than among obese women . however , even among overweight and obese persons , the combination of an appropriate diet , a moderate amount of exercise , and abstinence from smoking could substantially lower the risk of type 2 diabetes . although the percentage of cases that could be avoided by means of these lifestyle changes is lower among obese persons , the absolute number of cases avoided among such persons would be greater because of their higher risk . moreover , diet and exercise are the primary factors in determining weight loss . our present results are in agreement with our previous study of coronary disease , which found that adherence to similar guidelines was associated with an 83 percent reduction in risk . these analyses underscore the common lifestyle-related origins of diabetes and coronary disease and provide further evidence that modifications of diet and lifestyle have large and multiple benefits . clinical trials in china and finland have demonstrated the feasibility and efficacy of lifestyle-intervention programs in the prevention of diabetes in high-risk populations . among 577 patients with impaired glucose tolerance in da qing , china , exercise interventions , dietary interventions , or both resulted in a decrease of 42 to 46 percent in the rate of progression from impaired glucose tolerance to diabetes during six years of follow-up . recently , the finnish diabetes prevention program reported that the modification of lifestyle reduced the incidence of type 2 diabetes by 58 percent during 3.2 years of follow-up among 522 middle-aged , overweight participants with impaired glucose tolerance . the program included a relatively small reduction in weight ( less than 4.5 kg [ 10 lb ] ) , combined with a diet low in saturated and trans-fat and high in fiber and regular moderate exercise . results from the first three years of the diabetes prevention program in the united states also show that regular exercise and the modification of diet reduced the incidence of type 2 diabetes by 58 percent among patients with impaired glucose tolerance . our results suggest that closer adherence to behavioral guidelines could reduce the risk further in both low-risk and high-risk populations . because all the women in our study were health care professionals , our findings may not apply directly to the general population . however , since risk factors for diabetes tend to be more prevalent in the general population , the magnitude of the reduction in risk that would be achievable with adherence to the behavioral guidelines we outline would probably be even greater than the magnitude of the reduction we found . although some factors we considered � for example , alcohol use and smoking � have not been ( and will probably never be ) tested in randomized trials with clinical end points , ample observational data support their associations with diabetes . nevertheless , physicians must exercise caution in recommending alcohol use , since it may lead to overuse . finally , we did not consider pharmacologic means of preventing diabetes , some of which are being tested in ongoing clinical trials in high-risk populations . diagnoses of diabetes in our study were reported by the women but were confirmed by a supplementary questionnaire regarding symptoms , diagnostic tests , and treatment . our previous study found this confirmation to be highly accurate as compared with a review of the medical records . because the women in our cohort who did not have diabetes were not uniformly screened for glucose intolerance , some cases of diabetes may not have been diagnosed . however , when the analyses were restricted to symptomatic cases of diabetes , the findings were not altered substantially , suggesting that surveillance bias is unlikely . in conclusion , our findings suggest that the majority of cases of type 2 diabetes could be prevented by weight loss , regular exercise , modification of diet , abstinence from smoking , and the consumption of limited amounts of alcohol . weight control would appear to offer the greatest benefit . genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes : hyperglycemia of type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) results from a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors that influence a number of intermediate traits ( e.g . , g-cell mass , insulin secretion , insulin action , fat distribution , obesity ) . the primary biochemical events leading to diabetes are still unknown in most cases . although several monogenic forms of diabetes have been identified , tzdm seems to be a polygenic disorder in the majority of cases . t2dm is probably also multigenic , meaning that many different combinations of gene defects may exist among diabetic patients . significant results were obtained in the identification of the genetic determinants of monogenic forms of diabetes with young age of onset . however , despite the evidence for a strong genetic background , little of the genetic risk factors for the more-common forms of polygenic t2dm are known to date . the goal of this chapter is to summarize and discuss the significant results of recent literature on the genetics of both the monogenic and polygenic forms of tzdm . type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) is a heterogeneous syndrome resulting from defects of both insulin secretion and action . the precise molecular mechanisms leading to chronic hyperglycemia are largely unknown . it is generally accepted that t2dm results from a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors that influence a number of intermediate traits of relevance to the diabetic phenotype ( e.g . , p-cell mass , insulin secretion , insulin action , fat distribution , obesity ) . in fact , t2dm appears to be composed of subtypes whereby genetic susceptibility is strongly associated with environmental factors at one end of the spectrum and highly genetic forms at the other end . although several monogenic forms of diabetes have been identified - such as maturity onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) and maternally inherited diabetes and deafness ( midd ) . t2dm seems to be a polygenic disorder in the majority of cases . t2dm shows clear familial aggregation but does not segregate in classical mendelian fashion . t2dm seems to result either from several combined gene defects or from the simultaneous action of several susceptibility alleles or else from combinations of frequent variants at several loci that may have deleterious effects when predisposing environmental factors are present . type 2 diabetes is probably also multigenic , meaning that many different combinations of gene defects may exist among diabetic patients . the primary biochemical events leading to diabetes are still unknown in most cases . genetic and environmental factors may affect both insulin secretion and insulin action . a variety of environmental factors can be implicated in the clinical expression of t2dm , such as the degree and type of obesity , sedentarity , malnutrition in fetal and perinatal periods , lifestyle , and different kinds of drugs ( e.g , steroids , diuretics , antihypertensive agents ) . it is noteworthy that obesity , which is one of the so-called environmental determinants of t2dm , is also clearly under genetic control . both disorders are frequently associated and share many metabolic abnormalities , which suggests that they might also share susceptibility genes . moreover , retrospective studies showed that low birth weight was associated with insulin resistance and t2dm in adulthood . it has been proposed that this association results from a metabolic adaptation to poor fetal nutrition . however , the identification of gene variants that contribute both to variation in fetal growth and to the susceptibility to t2dm suggests that this metabolic �programming� could be partly genetically determined . these complex interactions between genes and environment complicate the task of identifying any single genetic susceptibility factor to t2dm . three genera ! approaches have been adopted to search for genes underlying complex traits such as t2dm . the first approach is to focus on candidate genes - that is , genes selected as having a plausible role in the control of glucose homeostasis - on the basis of their known or presumed biological functions . although this approach led to the identification of several susceptibility genes with small effects , no genes with moderate or major effect on the polygenic forms of diabetes have been identified . possible explanations for this failure to identify genes with a major effect include the possibility that they do not exist . it is also possible that our ignorance of the pathophysiological mechanisms of t2dm ( and the genes that control them ) has misled our choice of candidates . the second approach is to perform genome-wide scans for linkage in collections of nuclear families or sib-pairs with t2dm . this strategy requires no presumptions as to the function of the susceptibility loci . although a large number of regions of presumed linkage have been mapped , identification of the susceptibility genes is proceeding at very slow pace . the third approach to identify diabetes genes is to study spontaneous , bred , or transgenic animal models of t2dm . the genes responsible for diabetes in these models may not necessarily be major players in typical t2dm in humans . however , such studies provide the most-direct way to improve overall understanding of the molecular circuitry that maintains glucose homeostasis . nevertheless , despite the evidence for a strong genetic background in t2dm , very few of the genetic risk factors for t2dm are known . most of the available results were obtained by studying the highly familial and monogenic forms of diabetes with young age of onset . genetics of mody the well-defined mode of inheritance with high penetrance and the early age of onset of diabetes allows the collection of multigenerational pedigrees , making mody an attractive model for genetic studies . mody is a familial form of non-insulin dependent diabetes ( niddm ) with autosomal dominant inheritance . mody usually develops at childhood , adolescence , or young adulthood and presents primary insulin-secretion defects . mody is not a single entity but presents genetic , metabolic , and clinical heterogeneity . mutations in six genes cause most of the mody cases . these genes encode the enzyme glucokinase ( mody2/gck ) and the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha ( hnf-4/mody 1 ) , hnf 1 alpha ( hnf-lmody3 ) , insulin promoter factor 1 ( ipf-l/mody4 ) , hnf 1 beta ( hnf- 1 /modys ) , and neurod 1 /beta2 . moreover , additional mody genes probably exist , since there are families in which mody does not co-segregate with markers tightly linked to the known mody loci . although the prevalence of mody is unknown , it has been estimated that 2 to 5 percent of patients with t2dm may , in fact , have mody ( ledermann , 1995 ) . the relative prevalence of the different subtypes of mody has been shown to vary greatly in studies of british , french , german , and spanish families . ( mody2 represents from 8 to 63 percent of cases ( the most-prevalent form in french families ) and mody3 from 2 1 to 64 percent of cases ( the most-prevalent form in british families ) . the other mody subtypes are rare disorders in all these populations , having been described only in a few families . additional unknown mody locus/loci ( mody-x ) represent 16 to 45 percent of the cases of mody ( the most-prevalent form in german and spanish families ) . these contrasting results may be due to differences in the genetic background of these populations or else may reflect , at least partially , ascertainment bias in the recruitment of families . glucokinase mutations and mody2 : glucokinase ( gck ) phosphorylates glucose to glucose-6phosphate in pancreatic l3 cells and hepatocytes and plays a major role in the regulation and integration of glucose metabolism . more than 80 different gck mutations have been observed . expression studies have shown that the enzymatic activity of the mutant proteins was impaired , resulting in decreased glycolytic flux in pancreatic l3 cells . this defect translates in vivo as a glucose sensing defect , leading to an increase in the blood glucose threshold that triggers insulin secretion and a right shift in the dose-response curve of glucose-induced insulin secretion . decreased net accumulation of hepatic glycogen and augmented hepatic gluconeogenesis following meals were observed in gck-deficient subjects and contribute to the post-prandial hyperglycemia of mody2 . despite these multiple defects in the pancreas and the liver , the hyperglycemia associated with gck mutations is often mild , with fewer than 50 percent of subjects presenting overt diabetes . there is a lower prevalence of diabetes microvascular complications ( i.e . , retinopathy and proteinuria ) in mody2 than in other subtypes of mody and late-onset t2dm . mutations in transcription factor genes : positional cloning of mody loci and studies in candidate genes have led to the identification of mutations in six transcription factors : hnf-la , hnf-1 l3 , hnf-4a , ipfl , and neurodl/beta2 . gene targeting experiments in animals recently has demonstrated that many of these islet-expressed genes have a key role in fetal development , p-cell differentiation , proliferation , and neogenesis . mutations in hnf-la account for most of the mutations associated with mody identified in nuclear factors . more than 80 different mutations located in the coding regions or in the promoter were found in various populations . an insulin secretory defect in the absence of insulin resistance was observed in diabetic and nondiabetic carriers of mody3 mutations , suggesting that hnf- 1 cx is , indeed , implicated in pancreatic p-cell function , in contrast to the usually mild hyperglycemia due to glucokinase deficiency , mody3 is a severe form of diabetes , often evolving to insulin requirement . microvascular complications of diabetes are observed as frequently in mody3 as in late age of onset t2dm subjects . hnf- 1 c1 also is expressed in the kidney ; a defect in the renal resorption of glucose often is associated with the pancreatic p-cell defect in mody3 subjects . heterozygous knockout mice lacking one copy of hnf- 1 a have a normal phenotype , while mody3 subjects are all heterozygous for their mutations and fully express the diabetes phenotype . this observation suggests that these mutations might have a dominant-negative effect . however , experimental data show that only the mutations located in the transactivation domain of hnf-la have a dominant-negative effect on hnf-lo transactivation potential . mutations located elsewhere in the protein do not interfere with the activity of the normal allele . the target genes associated with the p-cell defect of mody3 remain unknown . contrasting results were observed in studies of knockout mice notably regarding the role of the insulin gene . modyl is much less prevalent than mody2 and mody3 . only a few kindred other than the large american rw family were found to carry an hnf-4o mutation . hnf-4a is a member of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily and upstream regulator of hnf-la expression . interestingly , it was demonstrated that long-chain fatty acids directly modulate the transcriptional activity of hnf-4a by binding as acyl-coa thioesters to the ligand binding domain of hnf-4a . this binding results in the activation or the inhibition of hnf-4a transcriptional activity as a function of chain length and the degree of saturation of the fatty acyl-coa ligand . this observation contributes important data to the understanding of the role of dietary fats in the control of insulin secretion . here , again , the target genes of hnf-4a associated with @ cell defect are not clearly determined . mutations in hnf- 1 p recently were described in a few families with familial diabetes with early onset consistent with mody . in these pedigrees , hnf-1p mutations were associated with diabetes and severe kidney disease that may appear before the impairment of glucose tolerance . polycystic renal disease and/or particular histological abnormalities showing meganephrons were present in some subjects , suggesting that this gene could play a major role in kidney development and nephron differentiation . it is noteworthy that hnf- 1 p and hnf- la can form heterodimers to bind dna . all of these genetic defects in transcription factors lead to abnormalities of glucose homeostasis , thereby promoting the development of chronic hyperglycemia through alterations in insulin secretion and possibly in the development of the pancreatic islets . in this regard , a deletion in the homeodomain transcription factor insulin promoter factor-l ( ipf-1 or idx- 1 , stf-1 , pdx-1 ) was found to co-segregate with mody in large kindred presenting a consanguineous link . this mutation results in a premature stop codon and a protein lacking a domain that is crucial for dna binding . the phenotype of the subjects who are heterozygous for the mutation ranges from normal to impaired glucose tolerance to overt niddm . one child who is homozygous for the mutation was born with pancreatic agenesis and suffers from diabetes as well as exocrine insufficiency . ipf-1 is critically required for the embryonic development of the pancreatic islets as well as for transcriptional regulation of endocrine pancreatic tissue-specific genes in adults , such as the insulin , glucose transporter-2 ( glut2 ) , and glucokinase genes in l3 cells and the somatostatin gene in & cells . ipf-1 normally is expressed in all cells of the pancreatic bud . its absence in mice arrests development at the bud stage , leading to pancreatic agenesis . the transcription factor neurodl ( also known as beta 2 ) is involved in the regulation of endocrine pancreas development . in mice homozygous for a targeted disruption of neurodl , pancreatic islet morphogenesis is abnormal , and hyperglycemia develops , due in part to inadequate expression of the insulin gene . recently , mutations in neurodl were shown to co-segregate with t2dm of early age of onset and autosomal dominant-like transmission in two caucasian kindreds . this observation suggests that neurod 1 might play an important role in endocrine pancreas development and/or insulin gene expression in humans . mitochondrial diabetes and wolfram syndrome : mitochondria contain their own genetic information in the form of a circular dna molecule of 16,569 base pairs that encodes 13 subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation complex , two ribosomal rnas , and 22 transfer rnas ( trna ) needed for mitochondrial protein synthesis . several mitochondrial cytopathies and syndromes caused by point mutations , deletions , or duplications of mitochondrial dna ( mtdna ) and characterized by decreased oxidative phosphorylation are associated with diabetes . moreover , about 40-point mutations of mtdna have been identified in subjects and families having maternally inherited diabetes as the main phenotypic trait . only one of these mutations , an a-to-g transition in the mitochondrial trnaleucuur ) gene at base-pair 3243 , has been systematically tested and phenotypically characterized in several populations . it co-segregates in families with diabetes and sensorineural deafness of maternal transmission , a syndrome known as maternally inherited diabetes and deafness ( midd ) . in some populations , midd might represent 1 to 3 percent of all cases of t2dm . the same mutation was observed in patients with melas - a syndrome of mitochondrial myopathy , encephalopathy , lactic acidosis , and stroke-like episodes -that is often accompanied by diabetes and deafness . the mechanisms underlying the different phenotypic expression ( midd or melas ) are unknown but might be related to the variable degree of heteroplasmy in different tissues . subjects with the 3243 mutations may present with variable clinical features , ranging from normal glucose tolerance to insulin-requiring diabetes . however , abnormalities in insulin secretion were found in all midd subjects that were tested , including those with normal glucose tolerance . the pathophysiological mechanisms leading to hyperglycemia and often to insulin-requiring diabetes in this syndrome are probably complex and multifactorial and might include defects in insulin production or glucose toxicity as well as insulin resistance . however , a defect of glucose-regulated insulin secretion is an early , possible primary abnormality in carriers of the mutation . this defect probably results from the progressive reduction of oxidative phosphorylation in p cells caused by the accumulation of mutant mitochondrial dna . wolfram syndrome ( or the acronym didmoad ) describes patients with diabetes insipidus , diabetes mellitus , optical atrophy , and deafness . other endocrine and neurological abnormalities often are associated in this genetically and clinically heterogeneous syndrome . wolfram syndrome is frequently transmitted as an autosomal recessive disorder by a locus mapped to the short arm of chromosome 4. this gene , named wfsl , recently was identified . it encodes wolframin , a protein showing no perceptible homology to known dna or protein sequences . the physiological function of wolframin and its link to diabetes remain unclear . in contrast to this autosomal recessive transmission , a few cases of wolfram syndrome were found to be associated with mitochondrial dna mutations . candidate genes and polygenic forms of t2dm : the majority of the genes found to play a role in the common forms of t2dm have been identified by testing candidate genes , the most-used approach , up to now , to tackle the genetic determinants of t2dm . reasons for candidacy are numerous : 1 ) known or presumed biological function in glucose homeostasis or energy balance in humans ; 2 ) gene implicated in subtypes of diabetes ( e.g . , mody ) ; 3 ) gene associated with diabetes or associated traits in animal models ; 4 ) gene responsible for an inherited disease that includes diabetes ( e.g . , mitochondrial cytopathies , wolfram syndrome ) ; or 5 ) product differentially expressed in diabetic and normal tissues . for obvious reasons , the insulin gene was among the first genes to be studied . mutations in the coding regions of the insulin gene ( chromosome 1 lp ) have been reported in less than 10 families but are not consistently associated with t2dm . however , mutations in the promoter region could affect the regulation of the insulin gene , leading to a decrease of transcription and absolute or relative hypoinsulinemia . a variant allele of the promoter was observed in about 5 percent of african americans with t2dm and shown to be associated with decreased transcriptional activity . more recently , an association between t2dm and paternally transmitted class iii alleles of the variable region upstream of the insulin gene ( ins-vntr ) was observed in british families . interestingly , class iii alleles also were found to be associated with increased length and weight at birth and with a dominant protection against type 1 diabetes , as compared with type i alleles . the role of the mody genes and of other transcription factors in the development of the more-common forms of late-onset t2dm is still under investigation . regarding the mody genes , most studies have excluded a major role in the genetic determinants of t2dm . however , mutations in hnf-la were identified in african-american and japanese subjects with atypical non-autoimmune diabetes of acute onset . a common polymorphism in hnf- la was found to be associated with mild insulin secretion defects . moreover , mutations in hnf-4a and ipfl were identified in a few families with late-onset t2dm . several other transcription factors have been studied : a mutation in islet brain 1 ( ib 1 ) was found to be associated with diabetes in one family . ibl is a homologue of the c-jun amino-terminal kinase interacting protein 1 ( jip-i ) , which plays a role in the modulation of apoptosis . ib 1 is also a transactivator of the islet glucose transporter , glut2 the mutant ibl was found to be unable to prevent apoptosis in vitro . it is thus possible that the abnormal function of this mutant ibl may render l3 cells more susceptible to apoptotic stimuli , thus decreasing p-cell mass . as glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity are known to induce both apoptosis and transcription factor down regulation in pancreatic l3 cells , inherited or acquired limitations in ibl activity could have deleterious effects in p-cell function . on the other hand , mutations in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ( ppary ) that severely decrease the transactivation potential were found to co-segregate with extreme insulin resistance , diabetes , and hypertension in two families with autosomal dominant inheritance . interestingly , given the proposed role of ppary in adipogenesis , all affected family members had no evidence of lipoatrophy or abnormal fat distribution . all together , these data suggest that mutations in transcription factors may contribute to the genetic risk to t2dm through various mechanisms : 1 ) dysregulation of target genes involved in glucose or lipid metabolism ( i.e . , hnfs , ppar ? / , ipfl , ibl ) ; 2 ) abnormal p-cell development and differentiation ( i.e . , ipfl , neurodl/beta2 ) ; or 3 ) dysregulation of p-cell apoptosis ( ibl ) . deleterious mutations that significantly impair the transactivation activity of these transcription factors can be responsible in some families for monogenic-like forms of diabetes with late age of onset , which may represent an intermediary phenotype between mody and the most common forms of t2dm . other genes encoding key components of insulin secretion pathways were tested as potential candidates for a role in the genetic susceptibility of t2dm . the pancreatic p-cell atp-sensitive potassium channel ( ikatp ) plays a central role in glucose-induced insulin secretion by linking signals derived from glucose metabolism to cell membrane depolarization and insulin exocytosis ( dukes and philipson , 1996 ) . ikatp is composed of two distinct subunits : an inwardly rectifying ion channel forming the pore ( kir6.2 ) and a regulatory subunit , a sulfonylurea receptor ( surl ) belonging to the atp binding cassette ( abc ) superfamily . the genes encoding these two subunits are located 4.5 kb apart on human chromosome i 1 ~15.1 . mutations in each of these genes may result in familial persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy , demonstrating their role in the regulation of insulin secretion . studies in various populations with different ethnic backgrounds provided evidence for associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) in these genes with t2dm . however , sib-pair analyses in several populations indicated that the surlikir6.2 region is not a major diabetogenie locus . key components of the insulin-signaling pathways also were tested . they were at first thought to be important players in the context of the insulin resistance of t2dm . several of these genes are expressed in pancreatic p cells . recent results in knockout animals demonstrated that they also play an important role in the mechanisms of insulin secretion . more than 50 different mutations have been found in the coding regions of the insulin receptor gene on chromosome 19p . however , patients with these mutations seldom present with the common form of t2dm but rather with syndromes of severe insulin resistance associated with leprechaunism or with acanthosis nigricans , hirsutism , or major hyperinsulinemia . missense variants in the coding regions of the gene encoding the first substrate for the insulin receptor kinase ( irs-l ) on chromosome 2q have been detected in several populations . however , association of these variants with diabetes was not observed in all these studies . similarly , an association between polymorphisms of the muscle glycogen synthase gene ( gsy 1 ) on chromosome 19q and t2dm was observed in finnish and in japanese subjects but not in french ones . taken together , these results suggest that irs- 1 and gsy 1 genes might act in some populations as minor susceptibility genes , which are neither necessary nor sufficient for disease expression but may nevertheless modulate the phenotype of patients . other genes were shown to be implicated in the genetic susceptibility to insulin resistance . although they do not seem to be directly linked to or associated with t2dm , they could modulate the expression of diabetes . a common and widespread polymorphism at codon 905 of the gene encoding the glycogen-associated regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase-1 of the skeletal muscle was shown to be associated with insulin resistance and hypersecretion of insulin in danish t2dm subjects . a missense mutation in the intestinal fatty acid binding protein 2 ( fabp2 ) gene on chromosome 4q was found to be associated with increased fatty acid binding , increased fat oxidation , and insulin resistance in the pima indians of arizona , an ethnic group with the highest reported prevalence of t2dm and insulin resistance in the world . a point mutation in the gene encoding the beta-3 adrenergic receptor was found to be associated with an increased capacity to gain weight in a population of morbidly obese subjects . this same mutation was associated with reduced metabolic rate and early onset of diabetes and with the development of upper-body obesity and insulin resistance in two t2dm populations . positional cloning of t2dm : genes the candidate gene approach presents limitations , as it is now clear that at least some t2dm susceptibility genes are likely to code for proteins of unknown function or a function not obviously implicated in glucose metabolism . the genome-wide linkage approach attempts to locate these unknown genes by a systematic search throughout the genome . this consists of genotyping the entire genome of affected sib-pairs or families with panels of 250-300 anonymous polymorphic markers to identify regions showing excess of allele sharing with the disease . this total genome approach has been successful in other multifactorial diseases such as type 1 diabetes and obesity . more than 20 genome scans for t2dm are currently underway , involving thousands of pedigrees from different populations and ethnic groups . one of the limitations of the genome-scan approach is the relatively low power of the method , ( i.e . , inabilty to detect weak linkage signal ) , which is due to the low relative risk for diabetes in siblings ( about a 3- to 5-fold increase , compared to the general population ) . working on large family collections , in homogenous ethnic groups , or in large pedigrees using quantitative traits instead of the dichotomous diabetes status could improve the efficiency to detect linkage . moreover , because of the large number of markers that are tested , false-positive results are likely to occur . thus , stringent criteria for linkage ( p < 1o-5 ) need to be used to minimize the bias due to multiple testing . results of several genome scans already have been published , a locus for t2dm on chromosome 2q ( niddmi ) was localized in mexican americans . it showed that an interaction of this locus with a locus on chromosome 15 further increases the susceptibility to diabetes in this population . linkage was found at a locus near mody3 on chromosome 12q in finnish t2dm families characterized by a predominant insulin secretion defect . evidence for an obesity-diabetes locus on chromosome 1 lq23-q25 and linkage of several chromosomal regions with pre-diabetic traits were observed in pima indians , an ethnic group with a high prevalence of diabetes and obesity . a strong linkage between diabetes and chromosome 1 q2 1- 1 q23 was reported in multigenerational families of northern european ancestry from utah . linkages with diabetes and with the age at onset of diabetes were found in a region on chromosome 1oq in mexican american families from san antonio . evidence for the presence of one or more diabetes loci on chromo some 20 was found in different populations . in these and other studies , many loci showing only suggestive or weak indication of linkage with diabetes-related traits have been reported , several of which fall in overlapping regions . although many of these loci may represent false-positive results , some may harbor true diabetes-susceptibility genes . comparisons of linkage result in different populations or family collections and/or meta-analysis of the data may help to guide positional cloning efforts . new statistical methods exploiting multiloci effects or analyzing quantitative traits should permit researchers to squeeze more power from genome-scan data . these genome scans have mapped loci within large chromosomal regions containing lo-20 million nucleotides . now , the challenge is to identify the diabetes-related genes within this interval . the classical approach that consisted of building a physical map of the region through contiguous artificial chromosomes spanning the entire region of linkage , followed by the cloning of the gene , is limited by size of the regions of linkage . an integrated genomic approach might be needed . it would combine linkage disequilibrium mapping , to define more-precise gene locations , with techniques to pick out the genes of these smaller regions ( e.g . , microarrays for the identification of genes differentially expressed in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects ) . these investigations will benefit from recent technological developments in snp identification and genotyping . moreover , the results from the human genome project - which include genomic dna sequences , expressed sequences , and expression profile databanks -will certainly make easier the identification of t2dm-susceptibility genes by positional cloning . the recent identification by graeme bell and coworkers of niddml as the gene encoding calpain 10 ( capn lo ) , a nonlysosomal cysteine protease , demonstrates the feasibility of positional cloning of polygenic t2dm genes . currently , it is believed that less than 15 percent of the genetic determinants of t2dm have been unveiled . it is likely that other genes contributing to the genetic risk of t2dm will be shortly discovered . the identification of t2dm genes will improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that maintain glucose homeostasis and of the precise molecular defects leading to chronic hyperglycemia . a nosological classification of t2dm , based on primary pathophysiological mechanisms , will then be possible . this could lead to the development of more-specifically targeted antidiabetic drugs or even gene-based therapies . moreover , pharmacogenetic testing might then be used to predict for each patient the therapeutic response to different classes of drugs . the identification of t2dm genes also will provide the tools for the timely identification of high-risk individuals who might benefit from early behavioral or medical intervention to prevent the development of diabetes . an important reduction in diabetes-related morbidity and mortality could be then expected , along with a reduction in the costs of treatment of diabetes and its complications . risk factors for type diabetes being 40 years of age or older ; having a close relative ( parent or sibling ) who has type 2 diabetes ; being a member of a highrisk population , such as those of african , arab , asian , hispanic , indigenous or south asian descent , low socioeconomic status ; having a history of prediabetes ( impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose ; ) having some evidence of the complications of diabetes , such as eye , nerve or kidney problems ; having heart disease ; having a history of gestational diabetes mellitus ; having high blood pressure ; having high cholesterol ; being overweight , especially around your abdomen . having a history of giving birth to a baby that weighed over 4 kg ( 9 lb ) at birth ; having obstructive sleep apnea ; having a history of using glucocorticoid medication type 2 diabetes : the basics of type 2 diabetes : type 2 diabetes is a disease in which your pancreas does not produce enough insulin , or your body does not properly use the insulin it makes . as a result , sugar ( glucose ) builds up in your blood instead of being used for energy . your body gets sugar from foods like bread , potatoes , rice , pasta , milk and fruit . to use this sugar , your body needs insulin . insulin is a hormone that helps your body to control the level of sugar in your blood . the good news you can live a long and healthy life by keeping your blood sugar levels in the target range set by you and your healthcare provider . you can do this by : eating healthy meals and snacks enjoying regular physical activity monitoring your blood sugar using a home blood glucose meter aiming for a healthy body weight taking diabetes medications including insulin , if prescribed by your doctor managing stress effectively discuss with your healthcare provider how often you should measure your blood sugar level get the support you need a positive and realistic attitude towards your diabetes can help you manage it . talk to others who have diabetes . ask your local diabetes canada branch about joining a peer support group or taking part in an information session . who can help you ? your healthcare team is there to help you . depending on your needs and the resources available in your community , your team may include a family doctor , diabetes educator ( nurse and/or dietitian ) , endocrinologist , pharmacist , social worker , exercise physiologist , psychologist , footcare specialist , eyecare specialist . they can answer your questions about how to manage diabetes and work with you to adjust your food plan , activity and medications . remember , you are the most important member of your healthcare team complications of diabetes type 2 diabetes is a progressive , lifelong disease . it may become more difficult to keep your blood sugar levels within your target range . high blood sugar levels can cause complications such as blindness , heart disease , kidney problems , nerve damage and erectile dysfunction . fortunately , good diabetes care and management can prevent or delay the onset of these complications . you can reduce your chances of developing these complications if you : keep your blood sugar within your target range avoid smoking keep your cholesterol and other blood fats within your target range keep your blood pressure within your target range take care of your feet have regular visits with your doctor , diabetes team , dentist and eyecare specialist discuss your target ranges with your healthcare provider related articles : managing your blood sugar , managing weight and diabetes , physical activity and diabetes , just the basics ( tips for healthy eating ) , cholesterol and diabetes , high blood pressure and diabetes , smoking and diabetes , foot care : a step toward good health , and staying healthy with diabetes genetics of type 2 diabetes : type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) is the result of interaction between environmental factors and a strong hereditary component . very few t2d risk genes were identified using candidate gene and linkage-based studies , but the advent of genome-wide association studies has led to the identification of multiple genes , including several that were not previously known to play any role in t2d . highly replicated genes , for example tcf7l2 , kcnq1 and kcnj11 , are discussed in greater detail . taken together , the genetic loci discovered to date explain only a small proportion of the observed heritability . we discuss possible explanations for this �missing heritability� , including the role of rare variants , gene-environment interactions and epigenetics . the clinical utility of current findings and avenues of future research are also discussed . diabetes has been recognized as a distinct disease for over 2000 years , but it was not until 1935 that hinsworth established that there were two district types of diabetes . while both common types of diabetes are characterized by sustained elevations of plasma glucose levels , type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease that results in complete loss of the insulin-producing ? -cells in the pancreatic islets , while type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) typically results when insulin secretion from the islets fails to keep pace with increasing insensitivity to the action of circulating insulin on its target tissues ( particularly muscle , liver , and fat ) . the development of t2d is the result of interaction between environmental factors and a strong hereditary component . environmental risks factors known to impact the development of t2d include obesity , sedentary lifestyle , small or large birth weight and stress . other nutritional factors and toxins may also play a role . these environmental factors clearly play a major role in the development of diabetes , but they do not impact everyone in the same way . even with the same environmental exposures , some people are more susceptible to developing diabetes than others , and this increased risk appears to be inherited . but while hereditary factors clearly play a role in the development of diabetes , the actual genetic variants involved in this inherited risk were completely unknown prior to the advent of modern genetic technologies . the advance of human genetic studies in the 1980s finally made it possible to try and identify genetic loci that underlie this hereditary component . here , we will review the heritability of t2d and the various genetic loci identified to date as contributing to this heritability . heritability of t2d : estimates for the heritability of t2dm range from 20 % -80 % and evidence for heritability comes from a variety of population , family , and twin-based studies . the lifetime risk of developing t2d is 40 % for individuals who have one parent with t2d and 70 % if both parents are affected . first degree relatives of individuals with t2d are about 3 times more likely to develop the disease than individuals without a positive family history of the disease . the concordance rate in monozygotic twins is about 70 % whereas the concordance in dizygotic twins has been observed to be only 20 % -30 % . the observed familial risk is higher when studies are restricted to parents in the 35�60-year age range , indicating the greater role played by environmental factors in those who develop diabetes late in life . it should be noted that a significant proportion of this heritability reflects heritability of obesity rather than diabetes , obesity being a major driver of t2d in every population . this familial clustering of t2dm risk found in various family studies is not entirely due to genetic factors . epigenetic processes can produce inherited risk over one or several generations , intrauterine and pregnancy related factors can impact the risk of siblings , and shared environment can be hard to control for in many such studies . thus , the genetic component of t2d may turn out to be less than what was estimated in older studies . genetic architecture of t2dm disease risk : the detailed genetic architecture of t2d risk has not yet been precisely defined . a relatively small percentage ( 5 % or less ) of non-autoimmune diabetes is due to monogenic causes and is classified as monogenic diabetes of the young or mody ( previously referred to as maturity onset diabetes of the young ) . these cases are understood to be caused by single genes of high penetrance , of which mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a ( hnf1a ) and the glucokinase ( gck ) gene are the most common . these forms of diabetes are sometimes misdiagnosed as t2d but clinically they are distinct diseases . they will not be considered further in this review , but it should be kept in mind that the boundaries between polygenic and monogenic forms are not always sharply defined at the genetic level . polymorphisms in genes involved in monogenic forms of diabetes also play a role in polygenic t2d . t2d itself is thought to be a polygenic disorder that develops due to complex interaction between multiple genes and environmental factors . how these genes interact with each other and with the environment to produce t2d is still poorly understood . unlike t1d , where the genetic risk is mostly concentrated in the hla region , the genetic component of t2d risk is not concentrated in one region and appears to be the result of the interaction of multiple genes scattered all across the genome . it is possible ; even likely , that the genetic component of t2d is due to multiple common genetic variants of small effect ( common disease common variant hypothesis ) but this is by no means certain and it may turn out that the effect is due to multiple rare variants or even a few rare variants of large effect . identification of diabetes risk genes linkage studies linkage is the tendency for genes and other genetic markers to be inherited together because of their location near one another on the same chromosome . while linkage analysis is simple in principle , it has relatively poor resolution as only a few hundred markers were usually genotyped across the genome , and the regions identified by linkage could include millions of base pairs and hundreds of genes . while these methods were quite successful in detecting rare variants of large effect ( e.g . , classical single gene disorders ) , they proved relatively unsuccessful in identifying genes that are involved in complex polygenic disorders . these studies only revealed two genes , calpain 10 ( capn10 ) and transcription factor 7-like 2 ( t-cell specific , hmg-box ) ( tcf7l2 ) that were reliably identified as being associated with t2d . capn10 : capn10 encodes a cysteine protease that is part of the calpain family , a large family of ubiquitously expressed genes that play multiple roles in intracellular remodeling , post-receptor signaling and other intracellular functions . it became the first t2d gene to be discovered by linkage analysis when a locus on chromosome 2 was associated with t2d in 1996. initially the locus was labeled niddm1 but the gene ( or genes ) involved were not identified . in 2000 the causative gene was finally identified as capn10 . subsequent studies did not always confirm this finding but larger meta-analyses have shown that variants in capn10 are likely to be truly associated with t2d.at this time the function of this gene in glucose metabolism remains unknown and its link to t2d , while confirmed in several populations , is not always consistent . tcf7l2 : tcf7l2 was discovered as a t2d susceptibility gene after a strong linkage signal was mapped to chromosome 10q in a mexican american population . this region was later fine-mapped in the icelandic population and confirmed in united states and danish cohorts , where the risk locus was found to be located in intron 3 of the tcf7l2 gene . the association between t2d and a number of single-nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) in the tcf7l2 gene has since been strongly confirmed in multiple genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) in different ethnic groups and this gene remains the most replicated and most strongly associated t2d risk gene at this time . we will discuss this gene further in the gwas section of this review . candidate gene studies : in candidate gene studies , genes already suspected of playing a role in the pathogenesis of t2d were studied through focused sequencing efforts . the usual strategy was to focus on genes already known to be involved in glucose metabolism , insulin secretion , insulin receptors , post-receptor signaling and lipid metabolism . somewhat to the surprise of investigators , most of the genes known to be involved in insulin secretion and action were not found to be associated with t2d in the population . the relatively few genes that were found to be associated with t2d include peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ( pparg ) , insulin receptor substrate 1 ( irs1 ) and irs-2 , potassium inwardly-rectifying channel , subfamily j , member 11 ( kcnj11 ) , wolfram syndrome 1 ( wolframin ) ( wfs1 ) , hnf1 homeobox a ( hnf1a ) , hnf1 homeobox b ( hnf1b ) and hnf4a . other genes including rapgef1 and tp53 were identified using an algorithm that prioritizes candidate genes for complex human traits based on trait-relevant functional annotation but have not been consistently replicated in later studies . pparg : pparg gene was an attractive candidate gene for t2d because it encodes the molecular target of thiazolidenediones , a commonly used class of anti-diabetic medications . it was found that a proline to arginine change at position 12 in the pparg gene led to a 20 % increase in the risk of diabetes . this finding has since been confirmed in some other populations and other polymorphisms in this gene have been found to play a role in some cases of diabetes . even so , the significance of these mutations was not replicated in all populations and the contribution of these polymorphisms to the worldwide prevalence of diabetes remains low . irs1 and irs-2 : insulin receptor substrate irs-1 and irs-2 genes encode peptides that play an important role in insulin signal transduction . polymorphisms in these genes were found to be associated with decreased insulin sensitivity in some populations but as with other candidate genes , the role played by these polymorphisms in the global burden of diabetes and related insulin-resistance disorders like pcos remains small . kcnj11 : kcnj11 gene encodes the kir6.2 atp-sensitive potassium channel that plays an important role in the regulation of insulin secretion by beta cells . activating mutations in this gene are a well-established cause of neonatal diabetes . a missense polymorphism in kcnj11 was found to be associated with t2d and confirmed in subsequent studies . the odds ratio of developing t2d is about 1.2 in carriers of the risk allele and this allele was also found to be associated with decreased insulin secretion in different populations . wfs-1 : wfs-1 gene encodes wolframin , a protein that is defective in individuals suffering from the wolfram syndrome ( characterized by diabetes insipidus , juvenile diabetes , optic atrophy , and deafness ) . wfs1 gene appears to be involved in beta cell function and 2 snps in wfs-1 were found to be significantly associated with t2d in a large case-control study involving about 24000 samples . this was subsequently confirmed in other studies in different populations . these studies provided evidence that beta cell dysfunction plays a critical role in the development of t2d and pointed out novel genes that play a previously unknown role in beta cell survival and function , but their role in the global burden of diabetes remains minor . hnf1a , hnf1b and hnf4a : hnf1a , hnf1b and hnf4a are all known mody genes ( i.e . , genes that harbor rare high penetrance mutations that cause monogenic diabetes of the young ) . these genes play a role in the development of the liver , in the regulation of hepatic metabolic functions , and in the development and functioning of beta cells . variants in these genes that do not lead to mody have been found to be associated with decreased insulin secretion and an increase in the risk of t2d in various populations , but as with other candidate genes , their role in worldwide diabetes prevalence appears to be relatively small . genome wide association studies candidate gene studies and linkage analysis identified a few t2d risk genes , but their overall contribution to the observed heritability of t2d remained small and it was clear that other techniques were needed to look for variants that were not easily identified by these methods . with the development of high-throughput snp genotyping technology and the availability of hapmap data , it became possible to scan hundreds of thousands of snps that were in linkage disequilibrium with millions of snps across the genome . tcf7l2 , already identified via linkage studies , was the most significant and most replicated signal found in gwas studies , but these studies also helped to identify scores of other genetic loci that appear to be linked to t2d . over the last 6 years , the number of known t2d variants has risen to over 60 ; including confirmation of variants identified earlier by candidate gene and linkage studies . while most studies have focused on europid populations , this is being rectified as more studies of asian , african and other populations become available . since obesity is a major contributor to the development of t2d , genes that increase the risk of obesity also show up in gwas for t2d . these include some frequently replicated genes include like fto and mc4r ; these genes seem to primarily impact obesity risk and effect t2d risk mostly via their effect on obesity ( though fto may have a small but detectable influence on t2d risk independent of the risk of obesity ) . here we will focus on genes that specifically increase the risk of t2d independent of obesity . the most important of these include tcf7l2 : this remains the most significant and consistently replicated gene linked to t2d . it was initially discovered by linkage studies , then confirmed in the very first large-scale gwas study conducted in a french population by sladek et al . this publication was followed in quick succession by several other major gwas paper , including the landmark welcome trust study that genotyped 2000 individuals with t2d along with 3000 controls and found that tcf7l2 was the most robust t2d signal , with an odds ratio of 1.36 for carriers heterozygous for the risk allele . this finding was then replicated in almost every human population studied and remains the most robust t2d risk gene identified to date . carriers of the various identified risk alleles have an or of 1.4 [ 49 ] and homozygotes may have an or of 2.5. tcf7l2 encodes a transcription factor that is a member of the wnt signaling pathway and is known to be active in the beta cells . studies in multiple ethnicities indicate that the risk allele is present in intron 3 of the tc-f7l2 gene . an early investigation revealed that the risk alleles increased the level of tcf7l2 protein in beta cells and was associated with impaired insulin secretion , incretin effects and enhanced rate of hepatic glucose production . tcf7l2 expression in human islets were increased 5-fold in t2d , particularly in homozygotes and overexpression of tcf7l2 in human islets reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion . these findings were replicated in several subsequent studies , indicating that tcf7l2 probably plays a role in causation of t2d by decreasing insulin secretion from beta cells , perhaps by altering the action of incretins that modulate the insulin response to meals . other studies indicate that alternative splicing of this gene can lead to the production of different isoforms in different tissues and the presence of specific isoforms in adipose tissue may be related to insulin sensitivity in that tissue . it is also possible that t2d risk is conferred by multiple mechanisms , including decreased beta cell insulin response and decreased insulin sensitivity in target tissues like adipose tissue . a recent murine study shows that , at least in mice , when tcf7l2 is knocked out in liver cells it leads to hypoglycemia and when it is overexpressed it causes hyperglycemia , but there is no effect when it is knocked out in the beta cells . this indicates that the liver may also be an important site where tcf7l2 variants influence glucose metabolism . finally , there are indications that this gene may play a role in cancer as well as in diabetes . thus , the discovery of its association with diabetes has opened several new avenues of research and should eventually lead to the characterization of previously unknown physiological mechanisms that play a role in both diabetes and cancer . hhex : hematopoietically expressed homeobox ( hhex ) while tcf7l2 remains the strongest t2d signal in gwas studies from across the globe , several other genes have been repeatedly identified in different populations as being associated with t2d . hhex was identified as one such gene in multiple studies in both caucasian and asian populations . located on chromosome 10q , this gene is also a member of the homeobox family and encodes a transcription factor involved in wnt signaling . risk alleles appear to confer an or of developing t2d of 1.5. the mechanism by which this gene confers diabetes risk remains poorly understood . slc30a8 : solute carrier family 30 ( zinc transporter ) , member 8 ( slc30a8 ) . this gene encodes for a protein that is involved in the storage and secretion of insulin granules and that is expressed at a high level only in the pancreas , particularly in the islets of langerhans . this provides an obvious mechanism by which it may be involved in conferring t2d risk and this association has been replicated in multiple studies in different populations . interestingly , this gene has also been found to be associated with the development and progression of type 1 diabetes though this has not been confirmed in all studies [ 64 ] . cdkn2a/b : cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2a/ b ( cdkn2a/b ) . snps located upstream of the cdkn2a2b genes have been associated with the risk of t2d in multiple large gwas . these genes are located on chromosome 9p21 and generate several transcript variants . at least three alternatively spliced variants of cdkn2a encoding distinct proteins have been reported , two of which are known to function as inhibitors of cdk4 kinase . cdkn2b is also located in the same region and generates at least 2 splice variants . both genes are important cell cycle regulators with a role in tumor suppression . this region was found to be associated with t2d in multiple gwas studies in different populations and it is estimated that the risk alleles confer an odds ratio for development of t2d of between 1.2 and 1.5. how variations in these genes alter diabetes risk remains unclear but recent research points to a role in insulin secretion rather than insulin action . these variants also show up in gwas for cardiovascular disease , in particular for atherosclerosis , but the mechanism underlying this association remains unknown . igf2bp2 : insulin-like growth factor 2 mrna binding protein 2 ( igf2bp2 ) encodes a protein that binds to the 5� utr of the insulin-like growth factor 2 ( igf2 ) mrna and thereby regulates igf2 translation . alternate transcriptional splice variants , encoding different isoforms , have been characterized . this gene has been found to be associated with t2d risk in multiple gwas . as with other variants like hhex and cdkn2a/b , it may play a role in beta cell function but the mechanism by which it influences t2d risk remains largely unknown . other genes linked to t2d risk include cdkal1 ( cdk5 regulatory subunit associated protein 1-like 1 ) , hmga2 ( high mobility group at-hook 2 ) , kcnq11 ( potassium voltage gated channel , kqt like subfamily , member 1 ) and notch2-adam30 ( notch 2-adam metallopeptidase domain 30 ) . their exact role in the pathophysiology of t2d remains mostly unknown . the odds ratios for individual risk alleles are generally less than 1.3 ( tcf7l2 and kcnq1 being the most prominent exceptions ) and it has been estimated that all the risk alleles identified to date can only explain about 10 % of the observed heritability of t2d . thus , these alleles can not be used to estimate the genetic risk of developing t2d in an individual patient with any degree of certainty since a simple family history will be much more informative than a detailed genotype at this point . but the discovery of these genes has opened entirely new avenues in our quest to understand the regulation of glucose metabolism and the development of t2d . for example , prior to these genetic studies , no one could have predicted that tcf7l2 plays any role in glucose regulation . but initially via linkage studies , and then in multiple gwas , it has been shown to be the single most significantly associated diabetes risk gene in the world . this has led to intensive investigation of its physiological role and though those investigations are at an early stage , it is hoped that they will eventually yield a new and more complete understanding of the mechanisms that regulate insulin secretion and action and whose alteration may lead to an increased risk for t2d . that in turn may lead to the identification of new drug targets , diagnostic tests , and targeted therapies ( pharmacogenomics ) . what do these genes do ? the fact that many of these genes are active in beta cells or may be involved in insulin secretion support the notion that beta cell dysfunction is a crucial final step on the path to diabetes . very few of these genes seem to play a role in insulin sensitivity ( though that may change as more information becomes available ) and genes involved in the insulin signaling pathway rarely show up in t2d gwas studies . when indices of beta-cell function ( homa-b ) and insulin sensitivity ( homa-ir ) derived from paired fasting glucose and insulin measures from 37000 individuals were used to try and identify the function most affected by various t2d risk genes , it was found that risk alleles at ten loci ( mtnr1b , slc30a8 , thada , tcf7l2 , kcnq1 , camk1d , cdkal1 , igf2bp2 , hnf1b and centd2 ) were associated ( p < 0.05 ) with reduced beta-cell function , and only three loci ( pparg , fto and klf14 ) were associated with reduced insulin sensitivity . it is possible that this may be because rare variants have a greater impact on insulin sensitivity or because environmental factors play a greater role in altering insulin sensitivity and thus swamp underlying genetic variation in risk . still , this finding was not expected when candidate gene studies were initiated and shows how agnostic high throughput methods like gwas can help to generate novel hypotheses and illuminate new aspects of biology . some of the genes found to be associated with t2d also appear to be linked to dyslipidemia , atherosclerotic heart disease and cancer and it is possible that as we learn more about the role of these genes , we may be able to understand more about the relationship between t2d and other components of the metabolic syndrome as well as cancer . gene-environment interactions : it is abundantly clear that the risk of developing t2d is heavily influenced by environmental factors . since our genetic code does not change significantly in one or two generations , the recent secular trend in diabetes must be due mostly to changes in the environment . increased adiposity is the single most significant factor in the development of t2d and the epidemics of obesity and t2d largely parallel one another . the increasing prevalence of obesity is thought to be related primarily to changes in dietary habits and our increasingly sedentary lifestyle , though other factors ( including toxins and infectious agents ) may play a role . genes may influence the risk of diabetes not only by directly altering insulin action or secretion , but also by altering how any given individual interacts with these environmental factors . even within the same broad environment , individuals vary greatly in their adoption of unhealthy lifestyles and their willingness to change such lifestyles . by influencing who adopts a more unhealthy diet ( this includes genetic influence on taste and food preferences ) , who exhibits greater willingness to change unhealthy behaviors , who burns more calories at rest , who exhibits greater activity levels when not actively exercising , what kind of microbiome an individual carries , and who opts for a more sedentary lifestyle , genetic factors can play a role in determining who becomes obese or develops diabetes in any given environment . these gene-environment interactions may be extremely complex and may be one reason why such a small proportion of the heritability of t2d has been explained at this time . epigenetics epigenetics refers to heritable changes in gene function that occur without a change in nucleotide sequence . mechanisms like dna-methylation , histone acetylation and non-coding rnas are used by the cell to regulate gene expression in response to environmental cues and can persist for an individual�s lifetime and can be passed on over 2-3 generations . it is well known that the maternal environment and early infancy can alter the lifelong risk of chronic diseases . for example , infants who are born small for gestational age are at an increased risk for the development of obesity and t2d as adults . some or most of this risk may be due to epigenetic changes in critical genes and animal experiments and initial human studies suggest that such mechanisms may indeed explain the impact of intrauterine nutrition and birth weight of future risk of diabetes , obesity and metabolic syndrome . it is thus possible that some of the observed heritability of t2d is due to epigenetic changes during intra-uterine life that are the result of maternal environmental influences , rather than inherited variations in the dna sequence . as our understanding of epigenetics advances and as the ability to profile genome-wide dna methylation and other epigenetic mechanisms becomes more widely used , we are likely to see important discoveries regarding the epigenetic changes that alter the risk of t2d . epigenetic profiling may also help to identify novel genes that play a role in the pathogenesis of t2d just as gwas led to the identification of multiple genes that were previously unsuspected of having a role in diabetes . risk prediction based on genetic information while we know that a person�s future risk of developing t2d has a significant heritable component and believe that most of this inherited risk is associated with particular genotypic features ( in most cases , multiple variants of small effect ) , and have identified several risk variants in genome-wide association studies , these variants still explain a relatively small proportion of the observed heritability . several studies have found that a risk score based on traditional risk factors ( bmi , family history , age , sex , hdl , triglycerides , etc . ) consistently outperforms any set of genetic markers and the addition of known genetic markers does not significantly improve prediction based on traditional risk factors . this indicates that our current state of knowledge regarding specific genetic markers is still incomplete and fails to explain most of the inherited risk . but as more data becomes available and better statistical techniques are applied to analyze gene-gene and gene-environment interactions , this predictive ability is likely to improve . even before that happens , these genetic discoveries have already provided important new insights into the pathophysiology of t2d and as the physiologic role of these genes in glucose regulation becomes clearer , these discoveries can be expected to lead to better diagnostic and therapeutic tools . potential applications are not limited to better risk prediction , new drug targets and better targeted drug therapy ; some time in the future when our technologies have improved far beyond current levels , they may include the ability to alter the risk of diabetes using gene therapy or epigenetic reprogramming . the risk factors of diabetes can be grouped into 2 1. those that can not be modified a. advancing age b. family history of diabetes 2. those that are modifiable a. overweight and obesity b. alcohol use c. tobacco use d. physical inactivity e. a stressful lifestyle f. unhealthy diet diagnosis diagnosis of diabetes in the majority of people presenting with the classical symptoms of diabetes , the diagnosis is straightforward . a fasting blood sugar level of more than 7m mol/l is diagnostic ( fasting means a person has not eaten overnight or for the last 8 hour ) a random blood sugar of more than 11.1mmol/l is diagnostic of diabetes . ( a random blood sugar of between 7.1m mol/l and 11.1m mol/l refer to hospital to confirm diagnosis ) . the goal of diabetes management is to improve the quality of life and productivity of people living with diabetes . there are two modalities of managing diabetes . ( diabetes education goes hand in hand with these two methods ) . non drug method ( use of proper diet and physical activity ) . use of drugs e.g . diabetes tablets for lowering blood sugar and insulin 1. education community members including people living with diabetes need to know : that diabetes is a serious lifelong disease that has no cure , but can be controlled . the pillars of management include : knowing what foods to eat , how much and how often to eat , knowing the importance and precautions of exercise , how and when to take diabetes medications that community should know and be encouraged to seek regular medical checkups which is essential for early detection of the disease people with diabetes need to know how to identify diabetes related emergencies arising from low or high blood sugar levels and when to seek medical help . pregnant mothers to be encouraged to check their blood sugars regularly . complications of diabetes are preventable . good blood sugar control is essential to prevent long term complications of diabetes . that people with diabetes have to look after their feet to prevent injuries and thus prevent ulcers and amputations . eating a healthy diet and increasing the level of physical activity should be the first steps in the management of newly diagnosed people with diabetes , and have to be maintained . good dietary practices in the management of diabetes mellitus appropriate diet and physical activity is important in maintaining an ideal body weight . reduced intake of animal fat , salt , and refined foods is recommended . locally available foods high in fiber , vegetables and fruits should be encouraged in the community the nutritionist or a trained diabetes educator can help you know the appropriate food portion sizes to meet your dietary requirement . eat a variety of foods in at-least three meals a day . alcohol and tobacco products use should be avoided . water is essential for normal body functioning . at-least eight glasses of water should be taken per day . physical activity regular physical activity helps in ; increasing insulin sensitivity thus improving blood sugar control , controlling blood pressure , improving blood flow in the heart and vessels , weight loss and maintenance of healthy body weight , giving one a sense of well-being . physical activity should be regular ( 3 days/week ) , lasting at least 20-30 min . per session , and be of at least moderate intensity . examples of physical activities you can involve yourself include ; housework , gardening , walking , climbing stairs . examples of exercises you can involve yourself include fast walking , cycling , jogging , playing games , weightlifting , rope jumping , swimming , indoor exercises e.g sit ups and press ups . activities like walking , climbing steps ( instead of taking lifts ) should be encouraged . people with diabetes require proper medical assessment before engaging in vigorous physical activity proper shoes must always be worn during exercises to avoid injury to the feet . diabetes is managed by use of medicines that can either be : oral blood sugar lowering tablets , insulin injection it is important to note that ; oral tablets are used when an individuals blood sugar control is not achieved using the combination of dietary modifications and physical activity/exercise . patients currently using tablets to control their blood sugar may at one time in the future need insulin as these tablets may no longer work in them . in some cases , oral tablets or insulin injection may be given at the time of diagnosis of diabetes if the blood sugar is extremely high . i.e . a fasting blood glucose level more than 11 mmol/lor random blood glucose level more than 15 mmol/l . individuals with type 1 diabetes must be on insulin for survival . principles of insulin administration the injection sites most commonly used for insulin are the abdomen , the thigh , and the outer upper arm . the rate of absorption is fastest on the abdomen . the thigh should be avoided as an injection site when exercise is going to be done , as this will increase the rate of absorption of the insulin . one area should be used for an injection at a particular time of day , e.g . the abdomen is the site for the morning injection , and the thigh is the site for the evening injection . within these areas , the injection site is to be rotated . to avoid formation of a hard scar ( seen as a lump ) injection on these scars should be avoided as insulin absorption is not predictable the injection should be done at a 90-degree angle with the skin using the recommended insulin administration syringe and needle . the needle should be held in place for 10 seconds after injection before withdrawal . early diagnosis of diabetes , good management and regular screening for complications can do much to reduce the burden that complications can impose on people living with diabetes and the health care system . diabetes complications are divided into two broad groups 1. short term complications 2. long term complications short term complications hypoglycemia ( low blood sugar ) occurs when the blood sugar is too low ; less than 3.5mmols/l it requires immediate treatment . causes : skipping or delaying meals , wrong timings of medication , eating inadequate meal portions , drug overdose , side effect of medication , unplanned and excessive , alcohol intake physical activity signs and symptoms : dizziness , confusion , weakness , reduced concentration , cold , sweaty skin , nervousness , profuse sweating , fast heartbeat , hunger , headache , irritability , numbness of tongue and mouth , bad dreams , fainting and loss of consciousness . prevention and treatment of hypoglycemia ( low blood sugar ) when the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia are noted , eat or drink a fast acting sugar e.g 3 teaspoons of sugar or honey ( can be dissolved in water ) , 3 sweets , 3 biscuits or 3/4 cup of juice or soda . then eat a meal . in case of unconscious person do not give fluids or food . instead apply moistened sugar or honey on the inner cheek lining ( not on the tongue ) if symptoms persist or recur refer to the hospital . prevention of hypoglycemia avoid skipping or delaying meals eat adequate food portions use medications as prescribed ( dosage and timing ) avoid alcohol use avoid unplanned and excessive physical activity note : the patient should always carry some sugar source ( e.g . 3 sweets , 3 biscuits or a light meal ) the patient should always carry or wear an identification tag/bracelet/card stating that they have diabetes . a note on hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) in case the blood sugar remains persistently high despite following the healthcare workers instructions on medication , please refer the patient urgently to see the nearest health facility . prevention and management long term complications of diabetes poorly controlled blood sugar can lead to long term complications of diabetes . long term complications arise due to damage of the blood vessels resulting in ; 1. diseases of the large blood vessels ( affects the brain and heart ) 2. diseases of the small blood vessels and nerves ( affects the eyes , kidneys , sexual organs and feet ) diabetes and the brain a person with diabetes is at higher risk for stroke than the general population . persistently elevated blood sugar levels contribute to the buildup of deposits in blood vessels thus leading to impaired blood flow or complete blockage and subsequently stroke . diabetes and the eye uncontrolled diabetes damages the small blood vessels at the back of the eye that enables one to see leading to poor vision and eventually to blindness . people with poorly controlled diabetes develops cataract at an earlier age than others . diabetes and the heart high blood sugar levels over time can lead to deposits causing the narrowing and the hardening of blood vessels that supply oxygen to the heart . therefore flow of blood to the heart can slow down or stop causing a heart attack . heart disease is the leading cause of death for people with diabetes . diabetes and the kidney high blood sugar can overwork the kidneys causing them to stop working properly and cause them to leak protein in the urine leading to kidney failure in the long run . diabetes and the sexual function poorly controlled diabetes damages nerves and blood vessels which are important for functioning of sexual organs . in women it may cause reduced urge to sex and painful intercourse . in men , it may cause impotence and erectile dysfunction . this increases with age and has a major psychological impact . uncontrolled diabetes can lead to nerve damage or poor blood supply to the feet and can lead to wounds on the feet which can get infected which if untreated can lead to amputation ( cutting of the leg ) . the dos of diabetes foot management 1. wash your feet regulary and dry between the toes 2. cut nails straight with a nail cutter and file the sharp edges 3. examine your feet daily , using a mirror or use an assistant 4. seek medical attention for bruises , cuts or blisters 5. examine your shoes daily for any foreign objects 6. moisturize your feet using creams or lotions ( avoid petroleum based jelly ) 7. test bathing water with your elbow before washing your feet to avoid burns 8. wear loose absorbent socks 9. shoes should be : closed and well-fitting fastened with laces or velcro wide enough to accommodate the toe bought in the afternoon as feet tend to swell towards the evening the don ’ ts of diabetes foot management 1. avoid walking bare foot 2. avoid smoking as it can harm blood circulation in your feet 3. avoid touching hot surfaces 4. avoid shoes with high heels and pointed toes . 5. avoid open shoes or sandals 6. avoid warming your feet in front of open fire 7. avoid wearing tight shoes without proper support and eat healthy foods : more vegetables and fruits , less carbohydrates , fats , sugars and salts ; exercise regularly : at least 30 minutes of brisk walking every day will do you good . take the stairs not the lift . walk short distances ; dont board a vehicle encourage children to have daily physical exercises . avoid smoking , if a smoker seeks assistance to quit smoking ; avoid harmful use of alcohol : excessive use of alcohol is dangerous to health ; its good to know you are healthy ; visit your nearest health facility for checkups for diabetes and blood pressure . early diagnosis and proper treatment prevents complications of diabetes ; dontwait until you are feeling unwell ; check your body mass index ( bmi ) : this is the ration of weight in kg/height in meters 2 for example : if your weight is 75kg and height is 154cm bmi=75/ ( 1.54 ) 2 =75/2.3716=31.6 less than 18.5 underweight 18.5-24.9 normal 25-29.9 overweight 30+ above obese . myths and misconceptions about diabetes the following are some of the misconceptions and myths regarding diabetes in kenya ; myth : diabetes is a disease of the rich fact : diabetes knows no boundaries and affects all the people across the board . myth : diabetes is the result of eating too much sugar fact : diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body . however , taking too much sugar may lead to obesity and overweight that are risk factors for developing diabetes . myth : only older people get diabetes fact : diabetes knows no boundaries and affects all the people across the board . despite older people being at a higher risk of developing diabetes , younger people also need to take precaution . myth : diabetes gets cured after a while fact : diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body . the damaged cells can not be brought back to life . once an individual develops diabetes , he/she shall need lifelong treatment that ranges from diet , exercises and or with drugs . myth : if you look fat/obese you are healthy despite having diabetes fact : obesity/overweight is a predisposing factor for diabetes . to avoid developing diabetes , you should maintain a healthy weight . myth : diabetes is the result of a curses/witchcraft fact : diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body . myth : diabetes is cured through prayers since it is brought on by evil spirits fact : diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body . spiritual support enhances good control of blood sugar . myth : traditional healers can cure diabetes using nutritional and herbal supplements fact : diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body . diabetes has no cure and can only be controlled by a combination of diet , exercises or drugs . myth : alternative therapy preferred over scientific therapy . fact : diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body . diabetes has no cure and can only be controlled by a combination of diet , exercises or drugs . myth : having diabetes means eating different foods from others . fact : people with diabetes don ’ t need to follow a restricted diet but instead should follow the same healthy eating guidelines as every person in the community which can be provided by a nutritionist in your local health facility . wagner et al . reported that increased pancreatic steatosis interacted with decreased insulin secretion . interestingly , wagner et al . performed sensitivity analyses across the 5 clusters of t2 addened by udler et al . and found that the interaction was driven by a pprs dening the liver metabolism/nafld gene cluster . finally , recent work using a pprs for lipodystrophy found that despite having lower bmi/waist circumference , those with a higher lipodystrophy pprs had significantly higher insulin resistance and low-density lipoprotein , portending possible increased cvd risk in this specific subpopulation . further work will be needed to elucidate the relationship between pprs and risk prediction/stratification in the clinical context . genetics and the potential for tailored therapy in t2d . examples from published reports that exemplify different physiological/molecular mechanisms and showcase how researchers move from gwas signal to a molecular mechanism . werst highlight colocalization : a method through which investigators can ne-map hundreds-to- thousands of gwas signals in a genetic region to the likely causal variant . colocalization can identify causal variants/genes , prioritizing translation . A powerful way to identify effector transcripts at gwas loci is to identify colocalization of association signals for disease risk and gene expression . colocalization of genetic signals is generally performed using summary-level statistics from gwas for disease ( eg , t2d ) and gwas for expression quantitative trait loci ( eqtl ) data , though any other type of genome- wide study data could also be used in colocalization methods ( ie , dna methylation data , histone methylation data , and so on ) . eqtl data rejects genome-wide variant associations with individual gene expression levels within a specific is supercell type ( eg , pancreatic islet ) . eqtls can be detected in multiple tissues ; however , working with disease-relevant tissues is the preferred approach , because eqtls are frequently tissue-specific . many genes are highly dependent on context-specificity , with their expression levels dependent on a combination of cell type , environmental perturbation ( eg , starvation vs hyperglycemia ) , and/or epigenome structure . in particular , epigenetics has become a focus in the last decade with mounting evidence that aging and dis- ease alter the physical structure of dna , potentially limiting gene expression even in cases where the context speci city is otherwise met . in this context , methods such as chromatin segregation to highlight the active and repressed regions of dna represent promising avenues through which to integrate many data sources and identify effector transcripts . identifying colocalization of a t2d gwas signal and an eqtl in a diabetes-relevant tissue , such as pancreatic islets , offers evidence for a potential causal link ( and thereby identities the effector transcript ) . in this causal relationship , the genetic variant influences pancreatic islet gene expression , which in turn affects t2d risk . in addition to the gtex database , recent publications of eqtl data for skeletal muscle , adipose , and pancreatic islet tissue have contributed to deciphering possible mechanistic links for t2d gwas variants . Examples of translation of t2d gwas signals into understanding of molecular mechanism/pathogenesis . the early identification of 2 independent coding variant signals in the pam gene for t2d risk provided a molecular signpost to the effector transcript ( ie , strongly implicating pam as the causal gene ) , accelerating efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms of pam . further work highlighted the association of pam with both t2d and beta-cell function . thomsen et al . reported that both coding alleles in the pam protein result in a loss of function , reducing the ability of this a misdating enzyme to increase the biological potency of glycine-extended neuropeptides . loss of pam in a human beta-cell model resulted in reduced insulin content and secretion , an effect also observed in isolated primary islets from carriers of the pam t2d-risk allele . even when the effector transcript and the tissue of effect are known , there can still be challenges . the slc30 a8 locus provides an example of the complexity . early gwas for t2d identified a nonsynonymous coding allele in slc30 a8 associated with t2d risk ; however , whether t2d risk was associated with loss vs gain-of-function in the gene was unclear from early functional and rodent studies , but human genetic evidence provided compelling support that loss-of-function in slc30 a8 was associated with diabetes protection . a recent study , combining detailed physiological characterization in human carrier soft the slc30 a8 loss-of- function variants coupled with cellular studies in a suite of human beta-cell models , demonstrated that the slc30 a8 t2 d-protective alleles cause enhanced insulin secretion . tm6 sf2 was rst identified as a missense variant ( hence identifying tm6 sf2 as the likely effector transcript ) that caused low low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ( ldl-c ) but paradoxically increased nafld risk . several groups found that tm6 sf2 was primarily expressed by the liver , and congruent work by smagris et al . and mahdessian et al . found that the likely mechanism of action for tm6 sf2 was through impaired very-low density lipoprotein release from the liver , leading to nafld via fat accumulation but also lower ldl-cin serum . subsequent work supports this proposed mechanism and has found that tm6 sf2 is associated with incident t2d , and in g that is supported by large- scale gwas that later identified tm6 sf2 as a t2d risk locus.a locus containing fto has long been associated with obesity , and fto knockout in mice reduces bmi . however , recent evidence suggests that fto is not the causal gene at this locus . the t2d risk allele in the locus increased both irx3 and irx5 gene expression . adding further weight to these convincing human studies , irx3 knockout mice recapitulated the prior fto knockout phenotype : they had substantially reduced body weight and increased brown adipose tissue , suggesting that irx3 , rather than fto , is the causal gene causing obesity and increased t2d/cvd risk . the example of fto/ irx3 illustrates the complexity in untangling the molecular mechanism of t2d gwas variants that are regulatory in nature , and highlights the importance of context ( correct tissue , at the right developmental time point , and with appropriate environmental conditions ) . mr is a powerful technique that leverages the random assortment of alleles during meiosis to assess potential causality between snv genotype and outcomes . an adverse drug reaction ( adr ) is also identified via an association with bacterial sepsis , warranting caution in prescribing inhibitor . 2 nonsense mutations in pcsk9 that resulted in drastically lower ldl-c , spurring drug development of pcsk9 inhibitors . a subsequent mr study demonstrated that loss-of-function variants in pcsk9 were associated with decreased ldl-c and cvd , suggesting a causal pathway . concurrent to this mr study , pcsk9 inhibition was found to reduce both ldl-cand cvd events . Mr can also be done at large-scale , allowing for rapid screening of multiple candidates for potential drug development . for example , folkersen et al . recently reported on genetic variants in sequencing 90 serum protein levels ( a protein quantitative trait loci pqtl study ) and performed an mr study that implicated a causal role for rage protein in t2d , whereby a ger ( the gene encoding rage ) snvs caused higher rageprotein levels and subsequent lower t2d risk . of note , their mr analysis did not need evidence of an association with alzheimers disease , for which a rage inhibitor had previously been studied . this study , in conjunction with prior work on pcsk9 inhibition , demonstrates the utility of mr in identifying novel drug targets and validating drugs under development . although classically described for snv alleles , mr can also be used to assess if a given pprs is causally associated with an outcome via an intermediate phenotype . for example , sanna et al . used a pprs for propionate , a fecal short-chain fatty acid , and found that the pprs was associated with both increased propionate levels and increased t2d risk . these results suggested that genetically controlled propionate levels were causally linked with differential t2d risk.similarly , sinnott-armstrong et al . leveraged deep phenotyping with protein and urine biomarkers to demonstrate causal relationships across many traits and diseases , including highlighting an emerging causal role for decreased ldl-c and increased t2d risk . phenome-wide association studies to identify potential non-label use for existing drugs . anal genetic tool that has broad relevance in drug repurposing and identification of potential adverse reactions is the phenome-wide association study ( phewas ) . a phewas inverts the study design of a gwas : a single snv is tested for association with multiple phenotypes , most commonly through the use of international classification of disease-10th revision codes in emr data . through such large-scale snv-disease associations , investigators can identify off -target effects ( otes ) that may represent targets for drug repurposing and also potential adverse drug reactions . however , after identification of an ote , further investigation must central illustration disentangling t2d pathogenic mechanisms , leading to precision medicine . partitioned polygenic risk scores ( pprs ) can identify the intermediate phenotypes that are driving t2d pathogenesis in a specific patient . with further research ( preferably with randomization concurrent with clinical implementation ) , we aim to develop an evidence base similar to that with monogenic diabetes s that tailors prevention/treatment strategies based upon a specific patient s genetics and pprs-identified pathologic pathways . b-cell pancreatic beta cell be undertaken to ensure that the direction of effect for the snv-disease association is consistent with beneficence . for example , although tm6 sf2 is associated with decreased ldl-c and cvd , it is concomitantly associated with increased nafld . as an example of phe was , cai et al . recently analyzed an il6 rsnv and found a significant association with abdominal aortic aneurysm , representing a possible ote . tocilizumab , an il-6 r antagonist , has since been approved for use in giant cell arteritis , of which a significant complication is aortic aneurysm . moreover , cai et al . found that decreased il-6 r levels were associated with increased risk of adverse drug reactions , eczema , conjunctivitis , and pleuritis , consistent with trial data for tocilizumab . these results offer a glimpse into the power of phewas for drug discovery and repurposing in t2d , as well as in identifying the likely side-effect profile of a given agent . Future directions for research into the genetics of t2d precision medicine for t2d using gprs/pprs . gprs can be used to risk-stratify patients , enabling earlier interventions and prevention of t2d patho-genesis and complications . we envision that gprs can be used to identify asymptomatic patients who are at high risk of developing t2d based on their non modifiable genetic risk . clinicians can then intervene with intensive lifestyle modification , medications ( eg , metformin ) , and/or counseling to prevent onset and progression of t2d . gprs-based risk stratification can also be implemented in conjunction with clinical covariates , as recently demonstrated by wagner et al . , as simple clinical covariates are excellent predictors of t2d-related complications . as we move toward more precise measurements and targeting of pathways , pprs for intermediate phenotypes has the potential to further renew our dignostics and therapeutics with regard to complex diseases like t2d . already , pprs methods have high-lighted unknown or unappreciated pathways ( such as nafld or lipodystrophy ) leading to t2d . although in the seminal work by udler et al . only 30 % of patients segregated to the highest decile of genetic risk for a given pprs , we suspect that this proportion will increase with larger/improved gwas particularly in non-european populations . more clinically relevant is the question of how pprs will change management of t2d : although we infer that t2d caused by lipodystrophy-like vs beta-cell failure processes can likely be optimally managed with different combinations of medications/lifestyle interventions , there is yet a paucity of evidence to support these hypotheses . hence , moving forward with gprs/ pprs in clinical settings , we strongly advocate for randomized studies to evaluate the effect of these genetic risk tools in clinical decision making and outcomes , simultaneous to its implementation . with such an evidence base available , we are hopeful that the treatment of t2d can mirror that of monogenic diabetes , whereby specific therapies are tailored to genotype . limited studies in non-european ancestry populations . perhaps the greatest limitation of research into the genomics of t2d and cvd is that the vast majority of studies have been performed in european-ancestry populations . recently , several high-profile gwas and other genetic studies for t2d have been performed for asian-ancestry and african-ancestry individuals . further gwas/genetic studies in non-european-ancestry populations are of crucial importance , as they serve as the input data for gprs/pprs , which in turn have the potential to identify patients at high risk for chronic diseases , thereby enabling clinicians to implement strategies for aggressive prevention/treatment . however , algorithms are strongly influenced by their input data and have already been shown to be less predictive in african-ancestry individuals . already , early application of rprs has found that efficacy is reduced when applied to african-ancestry subjects for t2d . similar application of rprs/gprs for cvd found attenuated effects in african-ancestry populations . factoring in multiethnic gwas data to create gprs/pprwhile accounting for complex population genetics will likely complicate matters further , as there is evidence of latent population structure even within the relatively racially homogenous uk bio bank . moreover , the largest stu dies currently are from european-ancestry populations , and g prs/p prsderived from these data perform poorly when extrapolated to other populations , hence exacerbating existing health disparities in non-white populations . in line with the recent international common disease alliance ( icda ) white paper , we believe that greater efforts must be made to ensure that all genetic ancestry groups are represented in biobanks linking genetic data and emrs and in the resulting discovery genetic work . metabolomics/proteomics and t2d . one growing area of research is the role of the metabolome/proteome in t2d pathogenesis . although the metabolome/proteome is vast , the majority of research has focused on the strong link between branched-chain amino acids ( bcaa ) and t2d risk . cross-sectional analyses rst found that bcaa levels were higher in t2d patients compared with healthy control subjects and positively correlated with insulin resistances . this finding was later confirmed in longitudinal data that showed a 2- 3.5/c2 increased risk of t2d with higher bcaa levels in 12 years of follow-up . the association between bcaa levels and t2d risk were later confirmed using mr , a likely causal relationship . given the predictive value of bcaa levels and the widespread use of metabolomic assays for newborn diagnoses ( eg , phenylketonuria ) , 1 promising avenue of investigation is the use of bcaa levels for precision medicine in identifying patients at high risk for t2d and implementing intensive preventative measures . conclusions and perspectives clustering methods allow for more precise sub-phenotyping of t2d and increased understanding of the pathophysiology leading to complex disease . in particular , genetic methodologies offer a wealth of information for a specific patient from a single peripheral blood draw . use of germline genetics for patients in combination with pprs has the potential to identify patients at high risk for specific intermediate phenotypes for t2d ( eg , nafld vs lipodystrophy ) , leading to earlier implementation of interventions tailored to the patient ’ s specific risk for various pathologic processes leading to t2d . in addition , development of novel methodologies has allowed for increased drug discovery and validation . further work will be required to elucidate and demonstrate the clinical utility of germline genotyping and pprs in t2d , particularly in non-european ancestry populations . obesity and type diabetes are diseases that can substantially decrease life expectancy , diminish quality of life and increase healthcare costs . the incidence of obesity and diabetes continues to rise by epidemic proportions . the term diabesity has been coin ed to describe obesity- dependent diabetes . according to the american diabetes association , in 2002 18.2 million people , or 6.3 percent of the population , had diabetes . diabetes was the sixth leading cause of death listed on u.s. death certificates in 2000. the direct and indirect cost of diabetes in the u.s. in 2002 was estimated at $ 132 billion . it has been estimated that the annual cost of overweight and obesity in the u.s. is $ 122.9 billion . this estimate accounts for $ 64.1 billion in direct costs and $ 58.8 billion in indirect costs . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a disease characterized by high levels of blood glucose resulting from defects in insulin production , insulin action or both . type 1 diabetes develops when the body 's immune system destroys pancreatic beta cells , the only cells in the body that make the hormone insulin that regulates blood glucose . this form of diabetes usually strikes children and young adults , although disease onset can occur at any age . type 1 diabetes accounts for only five to 10 percent of all diagnosed cases of diabetes . risk factors for type 1 diabetes include autoimmune , genetic and environmental factors . type 2 diabetes accounts for some 90 to 95 per-cent of all diagnosed cases of diabetes . it usually begins as insulin resistance , a disorder in which the cells do not use insulin properly . as the need for insulin rises , the pancreas gradually loses its by joanne z. rogers , msn , rn , cnsn , aprn , bc-ad , and christopher d. still , do , facn , facp obesity and type 2 diabetes ability to produce insulin . risk of type 2 diabetes the risk of developing type 2 diabetes is determined by some factors that can be modified and others that can not . some people are at higher risk for developing type 2 diabetes because of their genes . a first-degree relative of a person with types 2 diabetes has a risk five to 10 times higher than a person without a family history . another factor that may increase the risk of type 2 diabetes is low birth weight . intrauterine growth re striction leading to low birth weight seems to be associated with increased risk in adulthood of insulin resistance , glucose intolerance and type 2 diabetes . however , encouraging research studies in the u.s. and abroad have found that lifestyle changes , such as changes in diet and exercise , can prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes among high-risk adults . at all ages , the risk of type 2 diabetes rises with increasing body weight . the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is three to seven times higher in those who are obese than in normal weight adults , and is 20 times more likely in those with a body mass index ( bmi ) greater than 35 kg/m 2. obesity ’ s role in the development of type 2 diabetes it is not known for sure why some people develop insulin resistance , but it is known that obesity and lack of physical activity make it worse . the development of insulin resistance is an important component in the development of type diabetes . the connection is also seen in the f act that weight-loss can improve control or cure type 2 diabetes . in addition to the degree of obesity , where the excess body fat is deposited is important in determining the risk of type 2 diabetes . the degree of insulin resistance and the incidence of type 2 diabetes is highest in a person with an apple shape . these persons carry the majority of their excess body weight around their abdomen . in contrast , the pear shaped person carries most of their weight in the hips and thighs and this is not as likely to be associated with insulin resistance . treating obesity will treat type 2 diabetes weight-loss is an important goal for overweight or obese persons , particularly those with type 2 diabetes . moderate and sustained weight-loss ( five percent to 10 percent of body weight ) can improve insulin action , decrease fasting glucose concentrations and reduce the need for some diabetes medications . a program of diet , exercise and behavior modification can successfully treat obesity , but pharmacotherapy and/or surgery may be warranted . diet weight-loss occurs when energy expenditure exceeds energy intake . creating an energy deficit of 500-1,000 calories per day will result in a one to two pound weight-loss per week . writing down the food , portion size and calorie amount has been found to increase awareness and will provide objective evidence of calorie intake . for effective weight-loss , it is the calories that count , not the proportion of fat , carbohydrates or protein . however , when individuals are losing weight they should follow a diet similar to that recommended in the u.s. dietary guidelines for 2005 : fat 20-35 percent of calories ; carbo- hydrates 45-65 percent ; protein 10-35 percent . for the obese patient with diabetes or insulin resistance , limiting servings of complex carbohydrates may be beneficial . these foods include bread , rice , pasta , potatoes , cereal , peas and sweet potatoes . complex carbohydrates tend to raise blood sugar more than other foods and will cause the body to produce more insulin . with insulin resistance , these increased amounts of insulin can promote weight gain . increasing the amount of fiber in ones diet may be beneficial for both diabetes and obesity . a high intake of dietary fiber , particularly of the soluble type , may improve glycemic control , decreases hyperinsulinemia and lower plasma lipid concentrations in patient s with type 2 diabetes . additionally , high fiber foods assist in weight-loss and long- term weight maintenance by : requiring more chewing and taking longer to eat , providing fewer calories per serving , creating a sense of abdominal fullness and enhancing fullness between meals . physical activity regular physical activity helps maintain weight-loss and prevent regain . it also improves insulin sensitivity and glycemic control , may decrease the risk of developing diabetes and reduces mortality in patients with diabetes . a goal should be set for 30 to 45 minutes of moderate exercise five times per week . the exercise does not need to occur in a single session to be beneficial . dividing the activity into multiple and short episodes produces similar benefits and can enhance compliance . using a pedometer can help set objective exercise goals . gradually increasing the number of steps per day , with a goal of 8,000 steps , is ideal . any increase in activity over baseline will help in age sedentary moderate active male calorie requirements balancing the equation of less calories in and more calories out to promote weight-loss . medication there are several medications intended to treat diabetes , insulin resistance and obesity . a full review of these medications is beyond the scope of this article . however , metformin is one medication that has been found helpful in reducing the risk of type diabetes in patients with insulin resistance . metformin reduced the rate of progression to diabetes in obese persons with im-paired glucose tolerance . men treated with metformin who had central obesity and other features of metabolic syndrome ( insulin resistance , hypertension , hyperlipidemia ) had slightly more weight-loss and slightly lower fasting blood glucoses that those given a placebo . bariatric surgery according to the national institute of health ( nih ) , bariatric surgery should be considered by those who have a bmi greater than 40 , or have a bmi of 35-39.9 and medical problems such as diabetes , heart disease or sleep apnea . bariatric surgery changes the nor mal digestive process . there are three types of surgery : restrictive , malabsorptive and combined restrictive/mal absorptive . the nih web site provides an overview of the procedures and how they produce weight-loss . studies continue to show that diabetes can be cured in many patients using bariatric surgery . these clinical improvements occur not only because of the significant weight-loss , but be-cause of hormonal changes that occur when foods bypass the stomach . patients and their doctors need to consider the risk of bariatric surgery compared to the risk of obesity and the associated medical problems . when other methods of weight-loss have failed , bariatric surgery may be the best chance for significant and sustained weight-loss . prevention preventing and treating obesity will help in the prevention and treatment of diabetes . promoting a healthy lifestyle in children and adolescents will put them on a path that will decrease their risk of diabetes and its complications . helping adults at high risk for diabetes to change their diet and lifestyle may prevent them from developing diabetes and its consequences . diabetes is a term used to describe a cluster of conditions in which the body is unable to produce any or enough effective insulin . this is a hormone needed for glucose to enter the cells to be converted to energy . glucose is the fuel that your body needs . in your diet , this comes from foods such as fruit , milk , some vegetables , starchy foods and sugar . to help control your blood glucose you will need to eat healthy foods and be active . you may also need to take pills and /or insulin . there are two main types of diabetes type 1 : commonly diagnosed in children and adolescents , this occurs when the pancreas is unable to produce insulin . type 2 : usually developed in adulthood , this occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin and when the body does not effectively use the insulin that is produced . eating tips for diabetes 1. eat three meals each day , including breakfast . 2. try not to skip meals . 3. space meals 4 to 6 hours apart . 4. breakfast , lunch and supper should be about the same size . 5. avoid very large or very small meals . 6. have one piece of fresh fruit at each meal . 7. limit juice to 1/2 cup per day . 8. limit your intake to high fat foods , including deep fried or fried foods . 9. limit meat portions to the size of t he palm of your hand and choose fish or skinless poultry more often . 10. be careful of added fats . choose low fat or fat free dressings or spreads . eat right on the plate meal plan half of a standard dinner plate should contain at least two kinds of vegetables . of the remaining half , one quarter should contain starches such as potato , rice or pasta . the other quarter should contain protein , such as fish , lean meat , chicken , beans or lentils . also , be sure to have a beverage like milk and a piece of fresh fruit . handy portion guide your hands can be very useful in estimating appropriate portions . when planning a meal , use the following portion sizes as a guide : a serving size of peanut butter or cheese would be the size of two thumbs . a thumb-tip equals a teaspoon . three thumb-tips equal a tablespoon , about the amount of milk you would put in coffee . the palm of your hand equals a serving of meat , fish or poultry . this is about three ounces . a fist equals a cup . this would be the size of a serving of grains and starches . the fasting or before meal target should be 4.0 7.0 mmol/l , and that the 2 -hour post meal target should be 5.0 10.0 mmol/l . however , targets need to be individualized . ask your health care provider or diabetes education program what your blood glucose targets should be and your risk of hypoglycemia hypoglycemia this refers to a blood glucose level of less than 4 mmol/lor when symptoms are present at a level close to this . symptoms may include : trembling , shaky sweaty difficulty concentrating or thinking hungry be sure to inform any significant others of these potential symptoms for early hypoglycemia recognition . causes of hypoglycemia include : eating less than usual , or delayed meals or snacks undertaking more physical activity than usual recent weight loss drinking alcohol taking too much medication ( diabetes pill or insulin ) . what you need to do : 1. dont wait . act now ! chew 15 grams of glucose tablets or drink 3/4 cup ( 175 ml ) of juice or regular pop 2. follow- up check your blood sugar after 15 minutes . if less than 4 mmol/l , treat again if your usual meal is more than 1 hour away , you need a snack of slower -acting foods such as 6 crackers and cheese 3. check your blood sugar before and after treating a low blood sugar , if possible when to ask for assistance it is important to know the times when you need assistance . hypoglycemia ( low blood glucose ) and hyperglycemia ( high blood glucose ) can both become serious conditions if left untreated . when to call your health care provider , visit an emergency department or call for an ambulance ( 911 ) : hypoglycemia : more than 2 readings/day less than 4 mmol/lor3-4 readings less than 4 mmol/l in a week or any severe low blood glucose ( where you need help ) . hyperglycemia : for 2 consecutive days readings are higher than 14 mmol/l or you are experiencing symptoms such as ; nausea , vomiting , blurry vision , urinating more than usual , feeling weak or tired , or being unable to eat or drink . t2d is characterized by hyperglycemia from a combination of insulin resistance and relative deficiency of insulin secretion . the contribution of insulin resistance to diabetes pathogenesis explains the clinical association of diabetes with obesity and , subsequently , the coincidence of increasing t2d prevalence with increasing prevalence and severity of obesity in children . 4 differences have been described in the natural history of youth-onset t2d and adult-onset t2d . compared with adults , t2 din youth appears to progress more rapidly , with higher rates of metformin treatment failure and more rapid rates of beta cell decline . 5-7 the presence of diabetes encumbers those affected with a long-term burden of chronic disease and an increased risk of cardiovascular and microvascular complications . this risk in- creases with the duration of the disease , putting children with t2d at extremely high risk for complications . follow-up data from both the search for diabetes in youth study and the treatment options for diabetes in youth ( today ) trial have found a substantial presence of diabetes complications as early as adolescence and young adulthood . 8-11 moreover , the prevalence of complications and overall mortality are higher in youth with t2d compared with adults with t2d or even youth with type 1 diabetes . this burden of disease underscores the need to improve our understanding of diabetes risk , prevention , and optimal treatment in youth . t2 dis a complex , multifactorial disease influenced by both environmental factors and genetic variation as well as their interactions . the heritability of t2d is demonstrated by both the high concordance rates in identical twins and the typical presence of a family history of t2d in those with the disease . investigations of the genetics of diabetes risk have examined both overall t2d risk as well as individual glycemic traits that may predispose to diabetes , such as fasting glucose levels , insulin secretion , insulin resistance , and b-cell function . understanding the genetic underpinnings of diabetes risk offers an opportunity to improve both our knowledge of the mechanisms contributing to diabetes pathogenesis and our understanding of how best to individualize diabetes treatment and prevent complications . here we review the current state of t2d genetics , specifically as it pertains to children and adolescents . monogenic diabetes , diabetes as a result of a single gene abnormality , or mono-genic diabetes , shares clinical overlap with t2d , particularly t2d in youth . there are 3 major subgroups of monogenic diabetes : neonatal diabetes , syndromic diabetes , and maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) . Neonatal diabetes presents in infancy , although only a subset of infants develops diabetes in the neonatal period ( the first 30 days of life ) ; the majority of patients become symptomatic within the first 6 months of life . syndromic diabetes presents with additional extra pancreatic features , typically also in in-fancy . mody is characterized by noninsulin-dependent diabetes diagnosed at a young age ( < 25 years ) demonstrating an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern . subtypes of mody are based on specific genetic defects , with involvement of different genes associated with differences in clinical and physiologic phenotypes . monogenic diabetes can be caused by pathogenic muta- tions in genes that disrupt glucose sensing , insulin transcription , the potassium adenosine triphosphate channel that transduces the signal for insulin release , the insulin gene , or pancreatic development . understanding the genes associated with monogenic forms of diabetes has provided insight into the disease mechanisms of diabetes . eleven different genes have been identied as causal for mody in the online mendelian inheritance in man catalog : hnf4 a ( mody1 ) , gck ( mody2 ) , hnf1 a ( mody3 ) , pdx1 ( mody4 ) , hnf1 b ( mody5 ) , neurod1 ( mody6 ) , cel ( mody8 ) , ins ( mody10 ) , abcc8 ( mody12 ) , kcnj11 ( mody13 ) , and appl1 ( mody14 ) . note that the genes previously re- ported as causal for mody7 , mody9 , and mody11 are absent from this list , owing to the recent proposal to eliminate them from the list of causal mody genes based on up-dated genetic evidence . mutations in the hnf4 aand hnf1 a genes lead to abnormal insulin secretion , and mody caused by variants in these genes can be effectively managed with oral sulfonylurea therapy . the gene encoding glucokinase , which phosphorylates glucose to glucose -- phosphatein pancreatic cells and acts as a glucose sensor , is characterized by a mild , stable hyperglycemia with a low risk of com-plications that commonly does not require any treatment . given the clinical overlap between t2d and rarer forms of diabetes , a long-held hypothesis is that the genetic underpinnings of both common and rare forms of diabetes might not be entirely distinct . multiple studies have shown that mody affects a small but not insignicant subset of youth with diabetes , including those clinically diagnosed with t2 d. the search for diabetes in youth study published the first systematic study of mody prevalence in us youth , which re-ported a 1.2 % overall prevalence of mody . a genetic sequencing study of participants in the today study found that 4.5 % carried a pathogenic variant in a mody gene . a larger genetic study conducted by the progress in diabetes genetics in youth ( prodigy ) consortium that included the today cohort , a second cohort recruited by the today researchers for genetic studies , and a subset of the search for diabetes in youth study participants identified a 2.8 % incidence of mody . these studies focused on rare , highly penetrant variants in known mody genes . in adult studies of t2d genetics , there is increasing overlap of common variant associations and genes associated with monogenic diabetes . although such associations have not yet been shown in youth with t2d , it is possible that further examination of rarer variants will find associations along a spectrum of disease risk in genes or pathways relevant to diabetes . candidate gene studies many efforts to understand the genetic underpinnings of t2 din children have focused on genetic variants with known associations with glycemic traits or t2d risk in adults , examining whether similar associations exist in youth . individual variants have been shown to have similar associations in children for both fasting glucose and the homeostasis model assessment of b-cell function . several t2d risk genes have been associated with youth-onset t2 d , including tcf7 l2 , slc16 a11 , and abca1 . genetic risk scores ( grss ) , which allow for the assessment of the aggregate genetic risk of a given trait , have demonstrated association of grss constructed from variants associated in adults with glycemic traits and/or t2d risk with fasting glucose and measures of b-cell function , 35-37as well as measures of insulin resistance in youth . two studies have examined the ability of grss to identify children at risk of progressing to t2 d ; even though the scores were shown to be associated with t2d risk , 36,39in one of the studies clinical factors such as body mass index ( bmi ) and family history of t2d had higher predictive utility . genome-wide association studies since the first genome-wide association study ( gwas ) for t2 din adults was published in 2007 , there has been an explosion of genetic discoveries related to adult t2d with extremely well-powered studies and advanced analytic techniques . at the time of this publication , > 400 variants have been associated with t2 din adults . in comparison , large scale studies of pediatric t2d have not been conducted , largely due to limited sample sizes . the prodigy study is a collaborative effort to increase understanding of the genetics of t2d in youth by combining the sample sizes and rich phenotypic data of 2 pediatric t2d studies with the genetic prowess and resources of a large-scale adult diabetes genetics consortium . in prodigy , we conducted the first gwas for t2d in youth to identify genetic variants specifically predisposing to youth-onset t2d . we performed our genetic analysis in 3006 multiethnic youth with t2d who were autoantibody-negative for selected pancreatic autoantibodies and 6061 adult controls aged > 50 years and diabetes-free . functional studies of candidate genes are needed to understand how the identified genetic variants affect disease risk . studies evaluating the interplay between lifestyle and genetic factors are also needed to comprehensively evaluate t2d risk in youth . applications of genetics in youth-onset t2d there has been substantive growth in our understanding of the genetics of t2 din youth secondary to large-scale improvements in genotyping technology , next-generation sequencing techniques , and collaborative approaches such as prodigy to increase sample sizes . here we appraise the various applications of genetics as it pertains to pediatric t2d . todd characterizing disease subtypes pediatric t2d is a heterogenous disease likely because of differing contributions from both environmental and genetic factors , as well as varying degrees of insulin resistance and b- cell dysfunction among individuals . the benefit of sulfonyl-ureas in mody is a concrete example of how genetics can be used to characterize disease and dictate treatment . although not always as targeted , genetics also can be used to characterize subtypes for the more common form of t2d . a soft clustering approach has been used to deconstruct the heterogeneity of t2d with groups of loci representing various mechanisms of disease based on b-cell function , insulin resistance , and fat . these efforts to categorize subtypes help to better characterize pathophysiology , with the hope of informing clinical management and the risk of complications in the future . the benefit of using genetic data to characterize disease is that it remains unchanged over an individuals lifetime and can be measured even before symptoms develop , a particularly valuable characteristic for high-risk children who often have very short latent periods before full-blown t2d develops . risk prediction current guidelines from the american diabetes association recommend screening youth with obesity for t2d based on the presence of certain additional risk factors , including a family history of t2d , high-risk race/ethnicity , maternal his-tory of gestational diabetes , and physical features associated with insulin resistance , such as acanthosis nigricans . although these criteria allow clinicians to readily identify youth requiring diabetes screening , it is not clear which of these youth will go on to develop t2d . in addition , there is no simple or direct correlation between clinical features as body mass index , fasting insulin level , or c-peptide level and the progression to t2d . in the early days of t2d gwas efforts , studies showed that a polygenic risk score for t2d in adults does not outperform clinical models of prediction , but when added to routine clinical risk factors , genetic information may enhance predictive utility , particularly for populations of younger adults in whom risk factors , such as glucose intolerance , might not have fully manifested . recently , a trans-ancestry polygenic risk score ( prs ) of 1 259 754 hap map3 variants and weights showed that the top 2 % of the prs distribution can identify adults with a roughly 2.5- to 4.5-fold increase in t2d risk . using the top 2 % of the prs as the classier , the reported prevalence-adjusted positive predictive value was 0.26 and the negative predictive value was 0.90. although the current clinical utility of prss remains limited , in the future more sophisticated scores derived from diverse populations likely will continue to improve the predictive performance of these scores . insight into biologic mechanisms genetic discovery can help uncover underlying biology related to t2d with the interrogation of pathways related to the genetic loci . for example , the intronic snprs7903146 in tcf7 l2 , which has one of the strongest known effect sizes for common variants in both youth and adults with t2 d , 33,40,45has been localized to islet-selective open chromatin in b-cells using a method called formaldehyde assisted isolation of regulatory elements sequencing . the high-risk t allele has been associated with increased transcription in islets and increased expression on cellular luciferase as says compared with the c allele , highlighting a mechanism by which this polymorphism may contribute to t2d risk . complementary approaches of studying diabetes and glycemic traits as well as regulatory and functional data can help improve our understanding of the underlying mechanisms contributing to t2d risk and progression . this is particularly important in youth , who have slightly different underlying pathogenic mechanisms compared with adults with t2d , such as b-cell hyperresponsiveness in the early disease phase and a higher rate of b-cell decline . predicting response to interventions often in clinical medicine , patients do not respond or have adverse effects to medications that take time to uncover , leading to delays in optimal management , patient dissatisfaction , and wasted resources . genetics may help identify those patients who may benefit the most from a certain intervention , allowing us to stratify patients , which in turn could lead to better targeting of clinical or public health interventions . for example , the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention was effective even in the participants with the greatest genetic risk burden for figure . schematic depicting how various pathophysiologic mechanisms that contribute to diabetes risk have underlying genetic contributions that can be distinct or overlapping with other processes . in adults , there has been extensive work evaluating the genetic determinants of metformin response , given the significant interindividual variability in metformin response and evidence of significant heritability , with gwass so far identifying 5 variants associated with metformin response . similarly , sulfonyl-ureas are metabolized predominantly by cytochrome p450 2 c9 ( cyp2 c9 ) , and loss-of-function alleles in cyp2 cp have been associated with a greater response to sulfonyl-ureas . there have been no pharmacogenetic studies of t2d in youth reported to date , and this is an area where additional research is needed . for example , 50 % of youth on metformin therapy do not have sustained glycemic control , 5a greater proportion than seen in adults . the mechanisms behind this difference is unclear , and identifying genetic variants associated with metformin response in youth potentially could help elucidate the reasons for treatment failure . conclusions given the exponential rise in the incidence of t2 din youth , the aggressive nature of the disease compared with adults , and the significant heritability of the disease , it is critical that we strive to better understand the genetic basis of t2d in youth . although studies of pediatric t2d genetics have lagged behind adult studies largely because of the difficulty conducting studies with large sample sizes , technological advances and collaborative efforts have helped moved the eld forward . however , much remains to be discovered , and further large-scale efforts with computational and functional follow-up of findings are needed to continue to advance our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of t2d in youth . the knowledge of genetics can be used to better understand the pathophysiology of the disease in youth , characterize subtypes , assist with disease prediction , and aid the targeting of pharmacologic interventions with the ultimate goal of developing a personalized medicine approach to tackle youth-onset t2d . what leads to diabetes ? type and type 2 diabetes have different causes , but there are two factors that are important in both . you inherit a predisposition to the disease , then something in your environment triggers it . that ’ s right : genes alone are not enough . one proof of this is identical twins . identical twins have identical genes . yet when one twin has type 1 diabetes , the other gets the disease , at most , only half the time . when one twin has type 2 diabetes , the other 's risk is three in four at most . in most cases of type 1 diabetes , people need to inherit risk factors from both parents . we think these factors must be more common in white people because white people have the highest rate of type 1 diabetes . because most people who are at risk do not get diabetes , researchers want to find out what the environmental triggers are . one trigger might be related to cold weather . type 1 diabetes develops more often in winter than summer and is more common in places with cold climates . another trigger might be viruses . it 's possible that a virus that has only mild effects on most people triggers type 1 diabetes in others . early diet may also play a role . for example , type 1 diabetes is less common in people who were breastfed and in those who first ate solid foods at later ages . in many people , the development of type 1 diabetes seems to take many years . in experiments that follow relatives of people with type 1 diabetes , researchers have found that most of those who later got diabetes had certain autoantibodies , or proteins that destroy bacteria or viruses ( antibodies `` gone bad `` that attack the body 's own tissues ) , in their blood for years before they are diagnosed . if you are a man with type 1 diabetes , the odds of your child developing diabetes are 1 in 17. if you are a woman with type 1 diabetes and your child was born before you were 25 , your child 's risk is 1 in 25. if your child was born after you turned 25 , your child 's risk is 1 in 100. your child 's risk is doubled if you developed diabetes before age 11. if both you and your partner have type 1 diabetes , the risk is between 1 in 10 and 1 in 4. there is an exception to these numbers : about one in every seven people with type 1 diabetes has a condition called type 2 polyglandular autoimmune syndrome . in addition to having diabetes , these people also have thyroid disease and a poorly working adrenal gland some also have other immune system disorders . if you have this syndrome , your child 's risk of getting the syndrome and developing type 1 diabetes , is one in two . researchers are learning how to predict a person 's odds of getting diabetes . for example , most white people with type 1 diabetes have genes called hla-dr3 or hla-dr4 , which are linked to autoimmune disease . if you and your child are white and share these genes , your child 's risk is higher . suspect genes in other ethnic groups are less well-studied , however , scientists believe the hla-dr7 gene may put african american ’ s at risk , and the hla-dr9 gene may put japanese people at risk . an antibodies test can be done for children who have siblings with type 1 diabetes . this test measures antibodies to insulin , to is let cells in the pancreas or to an enzyme called glutamic acid decarboxylase ( gad ) . high levels can indicate that a child has a higher risk of developing type 1 diabetes . if you think your child might have type 1 diabetes , contact your doctor . if a member of your family has type 1 diabetes , you may be eligible for a risk screening offered through the trial net pathway to prevention study . trial net risk screening is free to relatives of people with type 1 and uses a simple blood test that can detect your risk of type 1 diabetes years before symptoms appear . if you are in the early stages of type 1 diabetes , you may also be eligible for a prevention study . type 2 diabetes has a stronger link to family history and lineage than type 1 , and studies of twins have shown that genetics play a very strong role in the development of type 2 diabetes . race can also play a role . yet it also depends on environmental factors . lifestyle also influences the development of type 2 diabetes . obesity tends to run in families , and families often have similar eating and exercise habits . if you have a family history of type 2 diabetes , it may be difficult to figure out whether your diabetes is due to lifestyle factors or genetics . most likely it is due to both . however , do n't lose heart . studies show that it is possible to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes by exercising and losing weight . learn how you can prevent or delay type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes runs in families . in part , this is due to children learning bad habits eating a poor diet , not exercising from their parents . but there is also a genetic basis . the good news is , like in adults , it is possible to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes in youth by encouraging healthy food choices , exercise and weight loss . type 2 diabetes is a chronic metabolic condition that affects the way your body metabolizes sugar ( glucose ) , an important source of fuel for the body . in type 2 diabetes , your body either resists the effects of insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into your cells or does n't produce enough insulin to maintain normal glucose levels . what causes type 2 diabetes ? the main cause of type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . insulin resistance happens when cells in your muscles , fat and liver don ’ t respond as they should to insulin . insulin is a hormone your pancreas makes that ’ s essential for life and regulating blood sugar levels . if your body is n't responding to insulin properly , your pancreas has to make more insulin to try to overcome your increasing blood glucose levels ( hyperinsulinemia ) . if your cells become too resistant to insulin and your pancreas can ’ t make enough insulin to overcome it , it leads to type 2 diabetes . several factors can contribute to insulin resistance , including : genetics , excess body fat , especially in your belly and around your organs ( visceral fat ) , physical inactivity , eating highly processed , high-carbohydrate foods and saturated fats frequently , certain medications , like long-term corticosteroid use , hormonal disorders , like hypothyroidism and cushing syndrome , chronic stress and a lack of quality sleep . what is insulin ? insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas , a gland located behind the stomach . it plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar ( glucose ) levels . when you eat , your digestive system breaks down carbohydrates into glucose , which enters the bloodstream . in response to rising blood sugar levels , the pancreas releases insulin . the main functions of insulin include : facilitating glucose uptake : insulin enables cells in the muscles , fat , and liver to absorb glucose from the bloodstream . this allows cells to use glucose for energy . inhibiting glucose production : insulin suppresses the liver 's production of glucose . between meals , when blood sugar levels drop , the pancreas reduces insulin secretion , and the liver releases stored glucose to maintain normal blood sugar levels . promoting glycogen synthesis : insulin helps convert excess glucose into glycogen , a form of stored glucose , in the liver and muscles . this stored glycogen can be released when energy is needed . inhibiting fat breakdown : insulin also plays a role in inhibiting the breakdown of fats in fat cells . when insulin levels are high , the body tends to store excess calories as fat . in type 2 diabetes , the body may not use insulin effectively , leading to insulin resistance . this can result in the pancreas producing more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not be enough to regulate blood sugar levels , leading to elevated glucose in the bloodstream . maintaining proper insulin function is essential for overall health , and disruptions in insulin production or utilization can lead to conditions like diabetes . management of diabetes often involves strategies to regulate insulin levels , either through lifestyle modifications , medications , or insulin therapy . insulin resistance : in type 2 diabetes , the body 's cells become resistant to the action of insulin . insulin is needed to allow sugar ( glucose ) to enter cells for energy . when cells resist insulin 's signal , glucose builds up in the bloodstream , leading to high blood sugar levels . causes and risk factors : genetics : family history of diabetes can increase the risk . certain ethnic groups ( e.g . , african american , hispanic , native american ) are more prone . weight : being overweight or obese is a significant risk factor . physical inactivity : lack of exercise can contribute to insulin resistance . unhealthy diet : high consumption of processed foods , sugary beverages , and a lack of fiber . medical conditions : metabolic syndrome : a cluster of conditions ( abdominal obesity , high blood pressure , high triglycerides , low hdl cholesterol ) increases diabetes risk . polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : common in women and associated with insulin resistance . age and gender : risk increases with age , especially after 45. women with a history of gestational diabetes are at higher risk . symptoms : early symptoms : increased thirst ( polydipsia ) and hunger : experiencing excessive thirst and hunger . frequent urination : needing to urinate often , especially at night . fatigue : feeling tired and lethargic . tingling or numbness in your hands or feet dry skin . unexplained weight loss . advanced symptoms : blurred vision . slow wound healing . recurrent infections . people assigned female at birth ( afab ) may experience frequent vaginal yeast infections and/or urinary tract infections ( utis ) . if you have these symptoms , it 's important to see your healthcare provider . simple blood tests can diagnose t2d . diagnosis : blood tests : fasting blood sugar , oral glucose tolerance test , and a1c test . symptoms and clinical signs : your doctor may consider your symptoms and overall health . management : lifestyle changes : healthy diet , regular exercise , weight management . medications : oral medications or insulin therapy may be prescribed . monitoring : regular blood sugar monitoring is important . complications : untreated or poorly managed type 2 diabetes can lead to serious complications such as heart disease , stroke , kidney damage , nerve damage , and vision problems . cardiovascular complications : increased risk of heart disease and stroke . hypertension often accompanies diabetes . microvascular complications : nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . retinopathy ( vision problems ) . foot complications : peripheral neuropathy increases the risk of foot ulcers and amputations . management : lifestyle modifications : healthy diet emphasizing whole foods , fruits , vegetables , and fiber . regular physical activity . weight management . medications : oral medications ( e.g . , metformin ) to improve insulin sensitivity . insulin therapy if oral medications are insufficient . blood sugar monitoring : regular monitoring to track blood glucose levels . education and support : diabetes education on self-care and management . emotional support for coping with the psychological aspects of diabetes . prevention : healthy lifestyle : adopting a healthy diet and regular exercise . maintaining a healthy weight . regular check-ups : regular health check-ups to monitor blood sugar levels , blood pressure , and cholesterol . public health implications : global impact : rising prevalence worldwide , associated with urbanization and lifestyle changes . healthcare costs : substantial economic burden due to healthcare costs and productivity loss . what is obesity ? obesity is a medical condition characterized by the accumulation of excessive body fat to the extent that it may have a negative impact on health . it is often defined by body mass index ( bmi ) , which is a person 's weight in kilograms divided by the square of their height in meters . a bmi of 30 or higher is generally considered indicative of obesity . 1. bmi categories : underweight : bmi less than 18.5 normal weight : bmi 18.5 to 24.9 overweight : bmi 25 to 29.9 obesity : bmi 30 or higher 2. causes : caloric imbalance : obesity typically results from consuming more calories than the body uses , leading to the storage of excess energy as fat . genetics : genetic factors can influence an individual 's predisposition to obesity . environmental factors : factors such as unhealthy diets , sedentary lifestyles , and lack of access to nutritious foods can contribute . 3. health risks : obesity is associated with an increased risk of various health conditions , including : type 2 diabetes cardiovascular diseases ( heart disease and stroke ) certain types of cancer sleep apnea osteoarthritis respiratory problems mental health issues 4. prevention and management : adopting a healthy , balanced diet with appropriate portion sizes . engaging in regular physical activity . behavioral interventions and counseling . medical treatments and , in some cases , bariatric surgery for severe obesity . 5. global prevalence : obesity has become a global health concern , affecting people of all ages and socioeconomic backgrounds . the prevalence of obesity has risen significantly in recent decades . 6. stigma and discrimination : individuals with obesity may face societal stigma and discrimination , affecting their mental and emotional well-being . 7. childhood obesity : childhood obesity is a particular concern , as it can lead to health issues later in life . addressing obesity often requires a multifaceted approach , involving changes in diet , increased physical activity , behavioral modifications , and sometimes medical interventions . it 's essential to recognize obesity as a complex health issue with various contributing factors and to approach its prevention and management with a comprehensive and individualized strategy . what is high triglycerides ? triglycerides are a type of fat ( lipid ) found in your blood . when you eat , your body converts any calories it does n't need to use right away into triglycerides . these triglycerides are stored in fat cells for later use . while your body needs triglycerides for energy , having too high a level of triglycerides in your blood can be a risk factor for various health issues . normal triglyceride levels : normal : less than 150 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) borderline high : 150 to 199 mg/dl high : 200 to 499 mg/dl very high : 500 mg/dl or higher causes of high triglycerides : 1. unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated fats , trans fats , and refined carbohydrates can contribute to elevated triglyceride levels . 2. lack of physical activity : sedentary lifestyles and lack of regular exercise can lead to higher triglyceride levels . 3. obesity : being overweight or obese is often associated with higher triglyceride levels . 4. insulin resistance and diabetes : insulin resistance and diabetes can lead to increased triglycerides . 5. genetics : some people may have a genetic predisposition to higher triglyceride levels . 6. certain medical conditions : hypothyroidism , kidney disease , and liver disease can contribute to elevated triglycerides . 7. alcohol consumption : excessive alcohol intake can raise triglyceride levels . health risks associated with high triglycerides : 1. cardiovascular disease : high triglycerides , especially when combined with low levels of hdl cholesterol , can contribute to atherosclerosis ( hardening and narrowing of the arteries ) and increase the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2. pancreatitis : extremely high levels of triglycerides can lead to inflammation of the pancreas ( pancreatitis ) , a serious and potentially life-threatening condition . management of high triglycerides : 1. lifestyle changes : adopting a heart-healthy diet low in saturated and trans fats , and high in omega-3 fatty acids . regular physical activity . limiting alcohol intake . 2. medications : statins and other medications may be prescribed to lower triglyceride levels . 3. treatment of underlying conditions : managing underlying conditions such as diabetes or hypothyroidism . 4. regular monitoring : regular blood tests to monitor triglyceride levels . it 's important to note that managing triglyceride levels is often part of an overall strategy to maintain heart health . lifestyle modifications , including a healthy diet and regular exercise , are key components of preventing and managing high triglycerides . individuals with concerns about their triglyceride levels should consult with a healthcare professional for personalized advice and appropriate interventions . what is low hdl cholesterol ? hdl cholesterol , or high-density lipoprotein cholesterol , is often referred to as `` good `` cholesterol . it plays a crucial role in the body by helping to remove other forms of cholesterol , specifically low-density lipoprotein ( ldl ) cholesterol ( often called `` bad `` cholesterol ) , from the bloodstream . hdl cholesterol carries cholesterol away from the arteries and back to the liver , where it can be processed and eliminated . this process helps prevent the buildup of plaque in the arteries . normal hdl cholesterol levels : desirable : 60 mg/dl and above borderline : 40 to 59 mg/dl poor : less than 40 mg/dl causes of low hdl cholesterol : 1. unhealthy lifestyle : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle can contribute to low hdl cholesterol levels . 2.unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated and trans fats can lower hdl cholesterol . 3. smoking : smoking is associated with lower hdl cholesterol levels . 4.genetics : genetic factors can influence cholesterol levels , including hdl cholesterol . 5. obesity : being overweight or obese can be associated with lower hdl cholesterol . 6.certain medical conditions : type 2 diabetes , metabolic syndrome , and some rare genetic disorders can affect hdl cholesterol levels . health implications of low hdl cholesterol : 1. increased cardiovascular risk : low hdl cholesterol is considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease . hdl cholesterol helps remove cholesterol from the arteries , and low levels may contribute to the buildup of plaque , increasing the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2. combination with high ldl cholesterol : having both low hdl cholesterol and high ldl cholesterol can significantly elevate cardiovascular risk . management of low hdl cholesterol : 1. lifestyle changes : regular physical activity , including aerobic exercise , can help raise hdl cholesterol . adopting a heart-healthy diet that includes sources of healthy fats , such as omega-3 fatty acids . 2. quit smoking : quitting smoking can have positive effects on hdl cholesterol levels . 3. weight management : losing weight , if necessary , can improve hdl cholesterol levels . 4. medications : in some cases , medications may be prescribed to raise hdl cholesterol , although lifestyle changes are usually the first approach . it 's important to note that cholesterol levels are just one aspect of cardiovascular health , and overall heart health involves a combination of factors , including blood pressure , blood sugar , and lifestyle habits . individuals concerned about their cholesterol levels should consult with a healthcare professional for a thorough evaluation and personalized advice on managing their cardiovascular risk . what is hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) ? hyperglycemia happens when there ’ s too much sugar ( glucose ) in your blood . it 's also called high blood sugar or high blood glucose . this happens when your body has too little insulin ( a hormone ) or if your body ca n't use insulin properly ( insulin resistance ) . hyperglycemia usually means you have diabetes , and people with diabetes can experience hyperglycemia episodes frequently . if you have hyperglycemia that 's untreated for long periods of time , it can damage your nerves , blood vessels , tissues and organs . severe hyperglycemia can also lead to an acute ( sudden and severe ) life-threatening complication called diabetes-related ketoacidosis ( dka ) , especially in people with diabetes who take insulin or people with undiagnosed type 1 diabetes . this requires immediate medical treatment . what is blood sugar ? glucose ( sugar ) mainly comes from carbohydrates in the food and drinks you consume . it 's your body 's main source of energy . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . if you do n't have diabetes , several bodily processes naturally help keep your blood glucose in a healthy range . insulin , a hormone your pancreas makes , is the most significant contributor to maintaining healthy blood sugar . high blood sugar most often happens due to a lack of insulin or insulin resistance . this leads to diabetes . people who have diabetes must use medication , like oral diabetes medications or synthetic insulin , and/or lifestyle changes to help keep their blood sugar levels in range . current diabetes statistics in the philippines according to the international diabetes federation or idf , the prevalence rate of diabetes in filipino adults is approximately 6.3 % . that means that out of 63 million adults in our country , almost 4 million have diabetes . but , even with these high figures , there could be more undocumented diabetes cases in the philippines . after all , the idf didn ’ t include younger people in their data , and they didn ’ t take pre-diabetes into consideration . what ’ s even more alarming is that in a 2016 report , the world health organization announced that 6 % of all deaths in the philippines occurred due to diabetes . is type 2 diabetes genetic ? the cause of t2d is complex , but researchers know that genetics play a strong role . your lifetime risk of developing t2d is 40 % if you have one biological parent with t2d and 70 % if both of your biological parents have it . researchers have identified at least 150 dna variations linked to the risk of developing t2d some increase your risk and others decrease it . some of these variations may directly play a role in insulin resistance and insulin production . others may increase your risk of t2d by increasing your tendency to have overweight or obesity . these genetic variations likely act together with health and lifestyle factors to influence your overall risk of t2d . what are the risk factors for type 2 diabetes ? you ’ re more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you : have a family history of type 2 diabetes ( biological parent or sibling ) . are older than 45. have overweight or obesity ( a bmi greater than 25 ) . are physically active less than three times a week . are black , hispanic , native american , asian american or pacific islander . had gestational diabetes while pregnant . have high blood pressure or high cholesterol . have prediabetes . have polycystic ovarian syndrome ( pcos ) . as t2d symptoms typically come on slowly , it ’ s important to see your primary care provider regularly if you 're at risk for the condition . this way , they can do screenings , like a basic metabolic panel ( bmp ) , to check on your blood sugar levels . it ’ s better to catch t2d earlier rather than later . diagnosis and tests how is type 2 diabetes diagnosed ? the following blood tests help your healthcare provider diagnose type 2 diabetes : fasting plasma glucose test : this lab test checks your blood sugar level . you typically need to get this test in the morning after an eight-hour fast ( nothing to eat or drink except water ) . a result of 126 mg/dl or higher means you have diabetes . random plasma glucose test : this lab test also checks your blood sugar , but you can get it at any time without fasting . a result of 200 mg/dl or higher means you have diabetes . a1c test : this lab test measures your average blood sugar levels over the past two to three months . a result of 6.5 % or higher means you have diabetes . in some cases , your provider may order an auto antibody blood test to see if you have type 1 diabetes instead of t2d . management and treatment what is the treatment for type 2 diabetes ? unlike many health conditions , you mainly manage t2d on your own with medical guidance and support from your healthcare team . this could include your : primary care physician ( pcp ) or endocrinologist . registered dietitian . certified diabetes care and education specialist ( cdces ) . ophthalmologist ( eye doctor ) . dentist . your team should also include family members and other important people in your life . managing t2d can be challenging you have to make several decisions every day for it . but everything you do to improve your health is worth it . the core features of type 2 diabetes management include : lifestyle changes , like more exercise and eating adjustments . blood sugar monitoring . medication . exercise for type 2 diabetes regular activity is important for everyone . it 's even more important if you have diabetes . exercise is good for your health because it : lowers your blood sugar level without medication in the short term and long term . burns calories and may help with weight loss . improves blood flow and blood pressure . increases your energy level and boosts your mood . helps with stress management . talk to your provider before starting any exercise program . you may need to take special steps before , during and after physical activity , especially if you take insulin . the general goal is to get at least 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity physical activity . type 2 diabetes diet ask your healthcare provider or registered dietitian to recommend a meal plan that ’ s right for you . what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat are all important in keeping your blood sugar levels in the range that your healthcare team recommends . the key to eating with type 2 diabetes is to eat a variety of nutritious foods from all food groups , in the amounts your meal plan outlines . in general , these types of foods can help support healthy blood sugar levels : lean proteins , like chicken , eggs , fish and turkey . non-starchy vegetables , like broccoli , green beans , salad greens and cucumbers . healthy fats , like avocados , nuts , natural peanut butter and olive oil . complex carbohydrates , like beans , berries , sweet potatoes and whole-wheat bread . blood sugar monitoring : monitoring your blood sugar is essential to finding out how well your current treatment plan is working . it gives you information on how to manage diabetes on a daily and sometimes even hourly basis . the results of blood sugar monitoring can help you make decisions about food , physical activity and dosing insulin . several things can affect your blood sugar . you can learn to predict some of these impacts with time and practice , while others are very difficult or impossible to predict . that ’ s why it ’ s important to check your blood sugar regularly if your healthcare provider recommends doing so . there are two main ways you can monitor your blood sugar at home if you have diabetes : with a glucose meter and finger stick . with a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) . you may choose either or both methods for a variety of reasons , such as : your access to the technology , which can vary due to cost and medical insurance coverage . how often your healthcare provider recommends checking your blood sugar . the medications you ’ re taking . your overall health . your healthcare provider may recommend taking medication , in addition to lifestyle changes , to manage type 2 diabetes . these include : oral diabetes medications : these are medications that you take by mouth to help manage blood sugar levels in people who have t2d but still produce some insulin . there are several types . the most commonly prescribed one is metformin . your provider may prescribe more than one oral diabetes medication at a time to achieve the best blood glucose management . glp-1 and dual glp-1/gipagonists : these are injectable medications that mainly help manage blood sugar levels in people with t2d . some glp-1 agonists can also help treat obesity . insulin : synthetic insulin directly lowers blood sugar levels . there are several types of insulin , like long-acting and short-acting types . you may inject it with syringes or pens , use inhaled insulin , or use an insulin pump . other medications : you may take other medications to manage coexisting conditions , like high blood pressure and high cholesterol . can type 2 diabetes be reversed ? type 2 diabetes is a chronic ( long-term ) disease , which means you must manage it for the rest of your life . there ’ s no cure for t2d . but you can manage it with lifestyle changes , medication and blood sugar monitoring in a way that keeps your blood sugar levels in a healthy range . if you stop managing it or undermanage it , your blood sugar levels will go back up . prevention can prevent type 2 diabetes ? certain strategies can help lower your risk of developing type 2 diabetes or delay its onset , including : exercising regularly ( at least 150 minutes a week ) . maintaining a weight that 's healthy for you . eating nutritious food . not smoking . unfortunately , some people have such strong genetic risk factors that even lifestyle changes are n't enough to prevent developing t2d . what is the outlook for type 2 diabetes ? if you have type 2 diabetes , your outlook depends on several factors , like : your age at diagnosis . how often and how well you ’ re able to keep your blood sugar levels in range . if you have other conditions , like high blood pressure or high cholesterol . your access to healthcare , diabetes management tools and medication , nutritious foods and support from loved ones . untreated or undermanaged t2d can lead to a range of health conditions . what are the complications of type 2 diabetes ? as your blood touches virtually every part of your body , having undermanaged type 2 diabetes that results in continuous high blood sugar over a long period of time can damage several areas of your body . potential complications of type 2 diabetes include : cardiovascular disease , including : coronary artery disease ( cad ) . peripheral artery disease ( pad ) . cerebrovascular disease . heart attack . stroke . eye conditions , including : diabetes-related retinopathy . diabetes-related macular edema . cataracts . glaucoma . blindness . additional complications include : diabetes-related nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . diabetes-related neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . skin conditions , like dry skin and bacterial and fungal infections . foot problems , including ulcers and infections that can lead to gangrene and possible amputation . gum disease and other oral health problems . hearing loss . digestive problems , including gastroparesis . sexual dysfunction . short-term complications of t2d hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state ( hhs ) is a life-threatening complication of type 2 diabetes . hhs happens when your blood sugar levels are too high for a long period , leading to severe dehydration and confusion . symptoms of hhs usually come on slowly and can take days or weeks to develop . symptoms include : very high blood sugar level ( over 600 mg/d l ) . mental changes , such as confusion , delirium or experiencing hallucinations . loss of consciousness . dry mouth and extreme thirst . frequent urination . blurred vision or loss of vision . weakness or paralysis that may be worse on one side of your body . hhs is life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment . if you experience these symptoms , call 911 or your local emergency services number . living with how do i take care of myself if i have type 2 diabetes ? type 2 diabetes is a complex condition that requires daily management , effort and planning . some tips that can help you manage t2d include : try to stick to healthy lifestyle changes : regular exercise and healthy eating plans are core parts of t2d management . set small goals and make one change at a time to prevent becoming overwhelmed . check your blood sugar regularly checking your blood sugar with a fingerstick and meter or using a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) is crucial to managing diabetes and preventing complications . follow your providers guidance for how often you should be checking it . take your medication regularly : follow your healthcare providers instructions for taking your medications ( if applicable ) . see your diabetes provider regularly : it 's important to see the provider who helps you manage t2d regularly to be sure that your management plan is working . don ’ t be afraid to ask them specific questions . see your other providers regularly , especially your eye doctor : type 2 diabetes can cause complications in various areas of your body , but especially your eyes . it ’ s important to see your eye doctor ( ophthalmologist ) at least yearly so that they can check the health of your eyes . have a sick day plan : talk with your diabetes provider about how to take care of yourself and manage t2d when you ’ re sick . illness can make it more difficult to manage blood sugar levels and can trigger hhs . stay educated : don ’ t be afraid to ask your provider questions about t2d . the more you know about t2d and your management , the more likely you 'll be able to live healthily and prevent complications . find community : connecting with other people who have t2d whether in-person or online can help you feel less alone . take care of your mental health : people with diabetes are two to three times more likely to have depression and are 20 % more likely to be diagnosed with anxiety than those without diabetes . living with a chronic condition that requires constant care can be overwhelming . it 's important to talk to a mental health professional if you 're experiencing signs of depression or anxiety . when should i see my healthcare provider if i have type 2 diabetes ? you ’ ll need to have regular appointments with your healthcare team to be sure you 're on track with your t2d management plan . as your body , life and routines change , your management will need to , as well . your healthcare team can provide new strategies that are unique to your needs . if you develop symptoms of any diabetes complications , be sure to see your provider as soon as possible . a note from cleveland clinic type 2 diabetes involves constant day-to-day care and management . while it 'll likely be very overwhelming at first , over time you 'll get a better grasp on how to manage the condition and how to be in tune with your body.be sure to see your healthcare team regularly . managing type 2 diabetes involves a team effort you ’ ll want both medical professionals and friends and family on your side . don ’ t hesitate to reach out to them if you need help . type 2 diabetes is a condition that happens because of a problem in the way the body regulates and uses sugar as a fuel . that sugar also is called glucose . this long-term condition results in too much sugar circulating in the blood . eventually , high blood sugar levels can lead to disorders of the circulatory , nervous and immune systems . in type 2 diabetes , there are primarily two problems . the pancreas does not produce enough insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into the cells . and cells respond poorly to insulin and take in less sugar . type 2 diabetes used to be known as adult-onset diabetes , but both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can begin during childhood and adulthood . type 2 is more common in older adults . but the increase in the number of children with obesity has led to more cases of type 2 diabetes in younger people . there 's no cure for type 2 diabetes . losing weight , eating well and exercising can help manage the disease . if diet and exercise are n't enough to control blood sugar , diabetes medications or insulin therapy may be recommended . symptoms symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly . in fact , you can be living with type 2 diabetes for years and not know it . when symptoms are present , they may include : increased thirst : experiencing a persistent feeling of thirst , often accompanied by a need to drink larger amounts of water than usual . frequent urination : having to urinate more often than usual , which may include waking up frequently during the night to urinate . increased hunger : feeling hungry more frequently or having an increased appetite , sometimes even after eating . unintended weight loss : losing weight without actively trying to do so , which may be a result of the body not properly utilizing glucose for energy . fatigue : persistent feelings of tiredness and lack of energy , even with adequate rest . - blurred vision : experiencing blurry or distorted vision , which can be a result of changes in the fluid levels within the eyes due to high blood sugar . slow-healing sores : wounds and sores taking longer to heal than usual , which is linked to reduced circulation and compromised immune function . slow healing of wounds : similar to slow-healing sores , individuals with diabetes may experience delays in the healing of cuts , bruises , or other injuries . frequent infections : increased susceptibility to infections , such as urinary tract infections , skin infections , and others , due to compromised immune function . numbness or tingling in the hands or feet : peripheral neuropathy , a condition where nerve damage can lead to sensations of numbness , tingling , or pain in the extremities . - areas of darkened skin , usually in the armpits and neck : acanthosis nigricans , a condition characterized by dark , thickened , and velvety skin in certain areas , often associated with insulin resistance . risk factors - insulin resistance : the primary factor in type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . the body 's cells become resistant to the effects of insulin , a hormone that helps regulate blood sugar . as a result , the pancreas produces more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not keep up with the increased demand . - genetics : there is a genetic predisposition to type 2 diabetes , and having a family history of the condition increases the risk . lifestyle factors : 1. obesity : excess body weight , especially around the abdomen , is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 2. physical inactivity : lack of regular physical activity is associated with an increased risk . 3. unhealthy diet : diets high in refined sugars , saturated fats , and processed foods can contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . age and ethnicity : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases with age , and certain ethnic groups , such as african americans , hispanics , native americans , and asian americans , are more prone to the condition . obesity : obesity is a medical condition characterized by an excessive accumulation of body fat . it is often measured using the body mass index ( bmi ) , with obesity defined as a bmi of 30 or higher . obesity is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes , as excess body fat can lead to insulin resistance . sedentary lifestyle : a sedentary lifestyle refers to a pattern of living that involves little or no physical activity or exercise . lack of regular physical activity is associated with various health risks , including an increased risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes . sedentary behavior may involve extended periods of sitting or low levels of physical movement . family history : family history refers to the presence of a particular health condition , such as diabetes , among close biological relatives ( parents , siblings ) . having a family history of diabetes can increase an individual 's risk of developing the condition , suggesting a genetic predisposition . age : age is a non-modifiable risk factor for type 2 diabetes . the risk of developing diabetes increases with age , particularly after the age of 45. this may be attributed to factors such as changes in metabolism , hormonal changes , and cumulative exposure to other risk factors over time . ethnicity : ethnicity refers to the cultural and ancestral background of an individual . certain ethnic groups have a higher predisposition to type 2 diabetes . for example , african americans , hispanics , native americans , asian americans , and pacific islanders are at an increased risk compared to the general population . genetic factors and lifestyle patterns within specific ethnic communities contribute to these disparities . causes - genes : scientists have found different bits of dna that affect how your body makes insulin . weight : having extra weight or obesity can cause insulin resistance . metabolic syndrome . people with insulin resistance often have a group of conditions including high blood sugar , high blood pressure , and high cholesterol and triglycerides . too much glucose from your liver : when your blood sugar is low , your liver makes and sends out glucose . after you eat , your blood sugar goes up , and your liver usually slows down and stores its glucose for later . but some people 's livers do n't . they keep making sugar . bad communication between cells : sometimes , cells send the wrong signals or do n't pick up messages correctly . when these problems affect how your cells make and use insulin or glucose , this can lead to diabetes . broken beta cells : if the cells that make insulin send it out at the wrong time , your blood sugar gets thrown off . high blood sugar can damage these cells , too . medical history and health : insulin resistance : insulin resistance is a condition where the body 's cells do not respond effectively to insulin , a hormone that regulates blood sugar . it can lead to elevated blood glucose levels and is a precursor to type 2 diabetes . prediabetes : prediabetes is a condition where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be classified as diabetes . individuals with prediabetes have an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes . heart and blood vessel disease : heart and blood vessel diseases encompass a range of conditions affecting the cardiovascular system , including coronary artery disease , heart failure , and stroke . diabetes is a significant risk factor for these diseases . high blood pressure : high blood pressure ( hypertension ) is a condition where the force of blood against the artery walls is consistently too high . it is a common risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , and individuals with diabetes are at an increased risk . low hdl ( `` good `` ) cholesterol : hdl cholesterol is often referred to as `` good `` cholesterol as it helps remove other forms of cholesterol from the bloodstream . low levels of hdl cholesterol are associated with an increased risk of heart disease . high triglycerides : triglycerides are a type of fat found in the blood . high levels of triglycerides are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease , and they often accompany conditions like obesity and insulin resistance . being overweight or having obesity : being overweight or having obesity is a condition where excess body fat accumulates , increasing the risk of developing type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and other health problems . - having a baby who weighed more than 9 pounds : giving birth to a baby weighing more than 9 pounds may be a risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes later in life . gestational diabetes : gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy . women who have had gestational diabetes are at an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life . polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : pcos is a hormonal disorder common among women of reproductive age . it is associated with insulin resistance and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . depression : depression is a mental health condition characterized by persistent feelings of sadness , loss of interest or pleasure , and other emotional and physical symptoms . it may be linked to an increased risk of developing diabetes . lifestyle factors : getting little or no exercise : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle are significant risk factors for type 2 diabetes . regular exercise helps improve insulin sensitivity and manage weight . smoking : smoking is a well-established risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , including heart disease . individuals who smoke and have diabetes face an increased risk of complications . stress : chronic stress can contribute to unhealthy lifestyle habits , such as overeating or not getting enough exercise , which may increase the risk of developing diabetes . sleeping too little or too much : disruptions in sleep patterns , whether due to insufficient sleep or excessive sleep , can affect metabolism and insulin sensitivity , potentially contributing to diabetes risk . type 2 diabetes diagnosis and tests diagnosing type 2 diabetes typically involves a combination of clinical evaluation and laboratory tests . here are the common methods and tests used for the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes : 1. symptoms and clinical evaluation : symptoms : the presence of classic symptoms such as increased thirst , frequent urination , unexplained weight loss , fatigue , and others may prompt further investigation . medical history : the healthcare provider will review the patient 's medical history , including family history of diabetes and other relevant factors . 2. fasting blood sugar test : this test measures the blood glucose level after an overnight fast ( usually at least 8 hours without eating or drinking anything except water ) . diagnostic criteria : a fasting blood sugar level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) or higher on two separate occasions generally indicates diabetes . 3. oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : the ogtt involves fasting overnight and then drinking a sugary solution . blood sugar levels are measured at intervals after consuming the solution . diagnostic criteria : a blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher two hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . 4. hemoglobin a1c test : this test measures the average blood glucose level over the past two to three months by assessing the percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) . diagnostic criteria : an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . 5. random blood sugar test : this test measures blood glucose levels at any time of the day , regardless of when the individual last ate . diagnostic criteria : a random blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher , along with diabetes symptoms , may indicate diabetes . 6. clinical guidelines and criteria : - world health organization ( who ) : the who also offers criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes , including fasting glucose levels and oral glucose tolerance tests . 7. blood tests : a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) test : purpose : measures the average percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) over the past 2 or 3 months . procedure : a blood sample is taken , and the result is expressed as a percentage . an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . fasting plasma glucose test : purpose : measures blood sugar levels after an overnight fast . procedure : the individual refrains from eating or drinking ( except water ) for at least 8 hours before the test . a blood sample is taken , and a fasting glucose level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) or higher on two separate occasions may indicate diabetes . oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : purpose : checks blood glucose levels before and 2 hours after consuming a sweetened beverage to evaluate how the body handles sugar . procedure : the individual drinks a sugary solution , and blood samples are taken before and after . a blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher 2 hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . it 's important to note that the diagnostic criteria and methods may vary slightly between different organizations and regions . additionally , the diagnosis is not solely based on a single test result ; healthcare providers consider multiple factors , including the patient 's overall health , risk factors , and symptoms . individuals at risk for type 2 diabetes , such as those with a family history or certain lifestyle factors , may undergo regular screenings to detect the condition early . early detection and management are crucial for preventing complications associated with diabetes . a healthcare professional will determine the most appropriate diagnostic approach based on the individual 's circumstances . stages of type 2 diabetes 1. insulin resistance : description : in this initial stage , the body usually produces enough insulin to regulate blood sugar levels within the normal range . however , cells resist the effects of insulin , meaning they do n't use it efficiently . as a result , the body compensates by producing more insulin to aid glucose entry into the cells . characteristics : insulin resistance may be temporary , but it can persist over time . there is n't a specific test to directly measure insulin resistance , making it challenging to diagnose this stage directly . 2. prediabetes : description : insulin resistance , if not addressed , leads to an accumulation of glucose in the blood . prediabetes is the stage where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not elevated enough to be classified as diabetes . during this stage , individuals may not experience noticeable symptoms . diagnostic criteria : an a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) level between 5.7 % and 6.4 % is indicative of prediabetes . this blood test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months . implications of prediabetes : individuals with prediabetes are at an increased risk for developing heart disease , stroke , and type 2 diabetes . early intervention through lifestyle modifications , such as a healthy diet and regular physical activity , can help prevent the progression to type 2 diabetes . it 's important to note that these stages represent a continuum , and the progression to type 2 diabetes is not inevitable . lifestyle changes , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , can play a crucial role in preventing or delaying the onset of type 2 diabetes in individuals with insulin resistance or prediabetes . regular health check-ups and screenings are important for early detection and intervention . type 2 diabetes treatment the treatment of type 2 diabetes involves a comprehensive approach that includes lifestyle changes and , in some cases , medication . here are the key components of type 2 diabetes treatment : 1. lifestyle changes : weight loss : objective : achieving and maintaining a healthy weight . benefits : weight loss can improve insulin sensitivity and help regulate blood sugar levels . recommendation : losing at least 7 % of body weight is considered beneficial . healthy eating : objective : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet . guidance : work with a registered dietitian to learn about carbohydrates , create a meal plan , and focus on : eating fewer calories . reducing consumption of refined carbs , especially sweets . incorporating more vegetables and fruits into the diet . increasing fiber intake . regular exercise : objective : engaging in regular physical activity . recommendation : aim for 30 to 60 minutes of exercise every day , which can include activities such as walking , biking , swimming , or other forms of aerobic exercise . strength training , like yoga or weightlifting , is also beneficial . note : check with your healthcare provider before starting a new exercise program , especially if you have other health concerns . monitoring blood sugar levels : objective : regularly checking blood sugar levels to track the effectiveness of treatment . guidance : depending on your treatment plan , especially if you are on insulin , your doctor will provide instructions on how often to monitor blood sugar levels . medication : purpose : medications may be prescribed to help manage blood sugar levels . types of medications : oral medications : these include various classes of drugs that help improve insulin sensitivity , reduce glucose production by the liver , and enhance glucose uptake by cells . injectable medications : some people may require insulin injections or other injectable medications to control blood sugar . regular medical check-ups : importance : regular visits to your healthcare provider are crucial to monitor overall health , adjust treatment plans as needed , and address any emerging issues . diabetes education : purpose : empower individuals with the knowledge and skills to manage their diabetes effectively . resources : diabetes education programs and support from healthcare professionals , including registered dietitians and diabetes educators . medication if lifestyle changes don ’ t get you to your target blood sugar levels , you may need medication . some of the most common for type 2 diabetes include : 1. metformin ( fortamet , glucophage , glumetza , riomet ) . this is usually the first medication used to treat type 2 diabetes . it lowers the amount of glucose your liver makes and helps your body respond better to the insulin it does make . 2. sulfonylureas . this group of drugs helps your body make more insulin . they include glimepiride ( amaryl ) , glipizide ( glucotrol ) , and glyburide ( dia beta , micronase ) . 3. meglitinides . they help your body make more insulin , and they work faster than sulfonylureas . you might take nateglinide ( starlix ) or repaglinide ( prandin ) . 4. thiazolidinediones . like metformin , they make you more sensitive to insulin . you could get pioglitazone ( actos ) or rosiglitazone ( avandia ) . but they also raise your risk of heart problems , so they are n't usually a first choice for treatment . 5. dpp-4 inhibitors . these medications -- linagliptin ( tradjenta ) , saxagliptin ( onglyza ) , and sitagliptin ( januvia ) help lower your blood sugar levels , but they can also cause joint pain and could inflame your pancreas . they work by blocking dpp-4 , which is an enzyme that affects the hormone incretin . 6. glp-1 receptor agonists . you take these medications with a needle to slow digestion and lower blood sugar levels . some of the most common ones are exenatide ( byetta , bydureon ) , liraglutide ( victoza ) , and semaglutide ( ozempic ) . 7. sglt2 inhibitors . these help your kidneys filter out more glucose . you might get bexagliflozin ( brenzavvy ) , canagliflozin ( invokana ) , dapagliflozin ( farxiga ) , or empagliflozin ( jardiance ) . empagliflozin has also proven effective in reducing the risk of hospitalization or death from heart failure . 8. gipand glp-1 receptor agonist . tirzepatide ( mounjaro ) is the first in its class and activates both the glp-1 and gipreceptors , which leads to improved blood sugar control . 9. insulin . you might take long-lasting shots at night , such as insulin detemir ( levemir ) or insulin glargine ( lantus ) . complications 1. cardiovascular diseases : description : high blood sugar levels over time can lead to damage in the heart and blood vessels , increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases . specific risks : increased likelihood of heart disease or stroke . higher risk of blocked blood vessels ( atherosclerosis ) . elevated risk of chest pain ( angina ) . 2. nerve damage ( neuropathy ) : description : prolonged exposure to high blood sugar can cause damage to the nerves throughout the body . specific risks : digestive issues . impaired feeling in the feet . sexual response problems . 3. kidney disease : description : diabetes is a leading cause of kidney disease and can lead to kidney failure . specific risks : kidney damage requiring dialysis or transplantation . 4. eye problems ( retinopathy ) : description : high blood sugar can damage the tiny blood vessels in the eyes , leading to vision problems . specific risks : retinopathy , which can cause blindness if untreated . 5. foot problems and amputation risk : description : poor circulation and nerve damage can contribute to foot problems , increasing the risk of infections and , in severe cases , amputation . specific risks : slower wound healing . increased risk of infections . 6. other complications : pregnancy : increased risk of miscarriage , stillbirth , or birth defects in infants born to parents with diabetes . sleep apnea : individuals with diabetes may be more prone to developing sleep apnea , a condition characterized by interrupted breathing during sleep . hearing problems : higher likelihood of hearing problems , though the exact relationship is not clear . brain health : high blood sugar levels may contribute to brain damage and an increased risk of conditions such as alzheimer 's disease . depression : people with diabetes are twice as likely to experience depression compared to those without the condition . type 2 diabetes diet guidelines : 1. work with a dietitian : collaborate with a registered dietitian to create a personalized meal plan based on your specific needs , preferences , and health goals . 2. focus on whole foods : limit highly processed foods : reduce the consumption of highly processed foods , which often contain added sugars , unhealthy fats , and high levels of sodium . choose whole , unprocessed foods whenever possible . control carbohydrates : 3. reduce added sugars : minimize the intake of foods and beverages with added sugars , such as sugary drinks , candies , and desserts . choose complex carbohydrates : opt for whole grains , legumes , and high-fiber foods to help regulate blood sugar levels . replace low-fiber refined grains ( e.g . , white bread ) with whole grains ( e.g . , whole wheat bread , brown rice ) . 4. prioritize non-starchy vegetables : include in every meal : boost your intake of non-starchy vegetables like broccoli , leafy greens , peppers , and green beans . these vegetables are rich in fiber , vitamins , and minerals . 5. moderate portion sizes : portion control : be mindful of portion sizes to manage calorie intake and prevent overeating . use smaller plates to help control portions . 6. lean protein sources : choose lean proteins : include lean protein sources such as poultry , fish , tofu , legumes , and low-fat dairy in your diet . limit red and processed meats . 7. healthy fats : opt for healthy fats : choose sources of healthy fats , such as avocados , nuts , seeds , and olive oil . limit saturated and trans fats found in fried foods and processed snacks . 8. regular meal timing : establish consistent meal times : aim for regular meal timings to help regulate blood sugar levels . include snacks if needed , especially if taking medications that may cause low blood sugar . 9. stay hydrated : drink water : stay hydrated by drinking water throughout the day . limit sugary beverages and alcohol . 10. monitor blood sugar responses : test and analyze : regularly monitor blood sugar levels to understand how different foods impact your readings . adjust your diet based on your blood sugar responses . 11. individualized approach : personalize your plan : recognize that individual responses to foods can vary . tailor your diet to your specific needs and preferences . 12. regular review and adjustments : stay in touch with healthcare providers : regularly review your diet plan with healthcare providers and make adjustments as needed . managing type 2 diabetes managing your type 2 diabetes well helps you avoid complications and feel your best . along with a healthy diet , regular exercise , and medication as prescribed : 1. keep your blood pressure and cholesterol levels in the healthy range . high levels of either could raise your risk of diabetes complications . 2. get regular eye exams , dentist visits , and physicals . 3. check your feet daily for sores , redness , or swelling and let your doctor know if you notice any issues . 4. get at least 7 hours of good-quality sleep each night , as sleep loss interferes with blood sugar control . ask your doctor for help if you have a hard time sleeping . 5. be careful with alcohol . limit alcoholic drinks to 1-2 drinks a day , depending on your size and gender . if you do drink alcohol , check your blood sugar afterward . 6. work with your doctor to come up with a sick day plan . even a minor illness can interfere with your blood sugar and insulin levels . you may need to adjust your medications or check your blood sugar more often . type 2 diabetes prevention strategies : 1. weight management : - aim to lose 7 % to 10 % of your body weight if overweight . - weight loss in this range can significantly reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes . 2. regular physical activity : engage in at least 30 minutes of brisk walking or moderate-intensity exercise most days of the week . physical activity helps improve insulin sensitivity and overall metabolic health . 3. healthy eating habits : avoid highly processed carbohydrates . limit the consumption of sugary drinks . reduce intake of trans and saturated fats . limit red and processed meat consumption . emphasize a balanced diet rich in fruits , vegetables , whole grains , lean proteins , and healthy fats . 4. smoking cessation : quit smoking to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes . work with your doctor to manage weight gain that may occur after quitting . 5. regular monitoring of health : keep track of key health indicators , including blood pressure , cholesterol levels , and body weight . regular health check-ups and screenings can help detect and address risk factors early . 6. healthy diet : adopt a well-balanced and nutritious diet that supports overall health . work with a dietitian if needed to create a personalized meal plan . 7. regular exercise routine : establish and maintain a regular exercise routine that includes both aerobic and strength-training exercises . exercise is a powerful tool in preventing and managing diabetes . 8. weight management : strive to maintain a healthy weight through a combination of a balanced diet and regular physical activity . weight management is crucial for overall health and diabetes prevention . 9. monitoring blood sugar levels : regularly monitor blood sugar levels , especially if you have risk factors for diabetes . early detection and intervention are key in preventing the progression to type 2 diabetes . 10. medications ( if prescribed ) : - if prescribed by a healthcare provider , take medications as directed . medications may be recommended for individuals at high risk of developing diabetes . preventing type 2 diabetes involves making consistent and sustainable lifestyle changes . these measures not only reduce the risk of diabetes but also contribute to overall well-being and long-term health . individuals with specific risk factors or a family history of diabetes should work closely with healthcare providers to develop a personalized prevention plan . monitoring : blood glucose levels : regular monitoring of blood glucose levels is essential to track how different factors , such as diet and exercise , affect blood sugar . a1c levels : the a1c test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months , offering insight into long-term glucose control . blood pressure : monitoring blood pressure is crucial , as individuals with diabetes have an increased risk of cardiovascular complications . cholesterol levels : keeping cholesterol levels in check is important for cardiovascular health , especially given the higher risk in diabetes . treatment options : oral medications : various classes of oral medications help manage blood sugar levels by improving insulin sensitivity , reducing glucose production , or aiding glucose uptake . insulin therapy : some individuals may require insulin injections to regulate blood sugar effectively . lifestyle modifications : healthy habits , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , are foundational to diabetes management . bariatric surgery : in specific cases , bariatric surgery may be considered as a treatment option . nutrition : carbohydrate counting : monitoring and managing carbohydrate intake is crucial for blood sugar control . glycemic index : understanding the glycemic index of foods helps individuals make informed choices to prevent rapid spikes in blood sugar . balanced meals : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet supports overall health and diabetes management . portion control : managing portion sizes helps regulate calorie intake and maintain stable blood sugar levels . education and support : diabetes education programs : these programs provide information and skills to individuals with diabetes for effective self-management . support groups : connecting with others facing similar challenges can provide emotional support and practical insights . lifestyle counseling : professional counseling helps individuals address behavioral aspects , set goals , and make sustainable lifestyle changes . medical professionals : 1. endocrinologist : specialization : endocrinologists are medical doctors who specialize in endocrinology , a field that focuses on the endocrine system and hormone-related disorders . diabetes falls under their expertise , as it involves the regulation of insulin , a key hormone . role in diabetes management : diagnosis : endocrinologists often play a crucial role in diagnosing diabetes , especially when the condition is complex or difficult to manage . treatment planning : they create comprehensive treatment plans tailored to the individual , considering factors like medication , insulin therapy , and lifestyle modifications . management of complications : endocrinologists are equipped to address and manage complications associated with diabetes , such as cardiovascular issues , kidney problems , and nerve damage . 2. diabetes educator : specialization : diabetes educators are healthcare professionals with specialized training in diabetes care and education . they may include nurses , dietitians , pharmacists , or other healthcare providers . role in diabetes management : education : diabetes educators empower individuals with diabetes through education , covering topics such as blood sugar monitoring , medication management , and lifestyle modifications . support : they provide ongoing support , helping individuals navigate the challenges of daily diabetes management and offering practical solutions . behavioral counseling : diabetes educators often engage in behavioral counseling to assist individuals in adopting and sustaining healthy habits . 3. dietitian/nutritionist : specialization : dietitians or nutritionists are experts in food and nutrition , with specialized training in providing dietary guidance for various health conditions , including diabetes . role in diabetes management : meal planning : dietitians help create personalized meal plans that align with diabetes management goals , considering factors like carbohydrate counting , glycemic index , and portion control . nutritional counseling : they offer nutritional counseling to address individual dietary preferences , cultural considerations , and lifestyle factors . weight management : dietitians play a crucial role in weight management , a key component of diabetes care . 4. primary care physician : specialization : primary care physicians ( pcps ) are general practitioners who provide comprehensive healthcare and serve as the first point of contact for individuals seeking medical care . role in diabetes management : initial diagnosis : pcps often diagnose type 2 diabetes during routine check-ups or in response to specific symptoms . - ongoing monitoring : they play a central role in the ongoing monitoring of diabetes and related health issues through regular check-ups . coordination of care : pcps coordinate with specialists , such as endocrinologists and diabetes educators , to ensure a comprehensive and integrated approach to diabetes management . - medication management : pcps may prescribe and manage medications for diabetes , adjusting treatment plans as needed . blood glucose monitoring devices : 1. glucometer : description : a glucometer , also known as a blood glucose meter or blood sugar meter , is a portable , handheld device designed for self-monitoring of blood glucose levels . how it works : - individuals with diabetes use a lancet to prick their fingertip and obtain a small drop of blood . this blood sample is then applied to a test strip inserted into the glucometer . the glucometer analyzes the blood sample and provides a digital readout of the current blood glucose level . key features : portability : glucometers are compact and easy to carry , allowing individuals to monitor their blood glucose levels conveniently at home or on the go . rapid results : the results are typically available within seconds , enabling quick and timely adjustments to medication , diet , or activity . usage : individuals often use glucometers multiple times a day to track variations in blood glucose levels . regular monitoring helps in understanding how food , physical activity , and medications impact blood sugar . advantages : cost-effective and widely accessible . easy to use for routine monitoring . limitations : provides a snapshot of blood glucose at a specific moment . does not capture trends or variations between measurements . 2. continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) : description : continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) systems are advanced devices that offer real-time monitoring of glucose levels throughout the day and night . how it works : a small sensor is inserted under the skin , usually on the abdomen . the sensor continuously measures glucose levels in the interstitial fluid ( fluid between cells ) and transmits this data to a monitor or a smartphone . the monitor displays real-time glucose levels and trends . key features : continuous monitoring : cgm systems provide a continuous stream of data , offering a more comprehensive view of glucose fluctuations . alerts and alarms : users can set customizable alerts for high and low glucose levels , enhancing proactive management . trend analysis : cgm devices provide graphs and trend lines , helping individuals understand how their glucose levels change over time . usage : cgm systems are typically worn for several days , up to two weeks , before requiring sensor replacement . data can be downloaded and shared with healthcare providers for comprehensive analysis . advantages : offers a more detailed and continuous picture of glucose dynamics . provides insights into how lifestyle factors impact glucose trends . limitations : - higher cost compared to traditional glucometers . requires sensor insertion beneath the skin , which may be uncomfortable for some individuals . genetic factors type 2 diabetes has a complex etiology , and both genetic and environmental factors contribute to its development . genetic factors play a significant role in determining an individual 's susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . here are some key aspects related to the genetic factors of type 2 diabetes : 1. family history : inheritance : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases if there is a family history of the condition . individuals with a first-degree relative ( parent or sibling ) with type 2 diabetes are at a higher risk . polygenic inheritance : multiple genes contribute to diabetes risk , and it often involves polygenic inheritance , meaning that several genes collectively influence susceptibility . 2. genetic variants and mutations : common variants : there are common genetic variants associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . these variants are often identified through genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) . rare mutations : in some cases , rare mutations in specific genes can significantly increase the risk of diabetes . examples include mutations in the hnf1 a and hnf4 a genes . 3. insulin resistance and beta cell function : genes influencing insulin sensitivity : genetic factors can impact insulin sensitivity , affecting how effectively cells respond to insulin . variations in genes like tcf7l2 are associated with insulin resistance . beta cell function genes : genes involved in the function of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas , such as those encoding for proinsulin processing , can influence diabetes risk . 4. epigenetic modifications : environmental influence on gene expression : epigenetic modifications , such as dna methylation and histone modification , can influence how genes related to glucose metabolism are expressed . lifestyle and environmental factors : environmental factors , including diet and lifestyle , can interact with genetic factors and contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . 5. interaction with lifestyle factors : gene-environment interaction : genetic factors interact with lifestyle and environmental factors , such as diet , physical activity , and obesity , influencing the overall risk of type 2 diabetes . obesity-related genes : some genes are associated with an increased risk of obesity , which is a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 6. mitochondrial dna : mitochondrial involvement : mitochondria , the energy-producing structures in cells , have their own dna . variations in mitochondrial dna have been studied in relation to type 2 diabetes . 7. ethnic and racial differences : population-specific variations : there are ethnic and racial differences in the prevalence of certain genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes . different populations may have unique genetic risk profiles . 8. genetic testing : risk prediction : genetic testing can provide information about an individual 's genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . however , it 's important to note that genetic testing is only one aspect of overall risk assessment , and lifestyle factors also play a significant role . since the discoveries of gregor mendel , modern biology has used genetics to study dna and rna and how the generation , expression and transmission of genetic information from generation to generation occur . genetics can be defined as the study of genes , the fundamental purpose of which is to investigate heritable traits . it is a branch of biology and is constantly evolving . it is considered that the first geneticist in history was gregor johann mendel , who developed the well-known mendelian laws that explain genetic inheritance . his experiments were with different varieties of peas . these findings were key for biology to find another way to study living organisms . genetics is very relevant , especially in determining the transmission of diseases from parents to children . we all have chromosomes , 23 inherited from the mother and 23 inherited from the father . the chromosomes contain the genes and are composed of dna , which is the code that provides the instructions . in fact , genes tell each cell how to behave . a genetic abnormality or mutation , in other words , a change in the instructions , can cause diseases or syndromes . sometimes they are mild , sometimes moderate and sometimes severe , depending on the case . genetics has several branches , such as classical genetics , developmental genetics and molecular genetics , among others . the cases of diabetes in the philippines is on the rise while it ’ s difficult to establish precisely how the prevalence rate of dm has been increasing through the years , some diabetes statistics in the philippines can still give us a clear picture . for instance , a year cohort study from 1998 to 2009 showed an alarming growth of diabetes in our country . additionally , in the 7th national nutrition and health survey ( nnhs ) of 2008 , the researchers found out that the prevalence rate of diabetes in our country was 4.8 % . five years later , in the 8th nnhs , the prevalence rate increased by 0.6 % . suffice to say , filipino doctors agree that the cases of diabetes in our country are steadily on the rise and that we need more aggressive measures for management and prevention . the risk factors of diabetes in the philippines based on a 2016 data , the world health organization reported that the related risk factors for diabetes in the philippines are being overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity . the same who report shows that : 3 % of filipinos are overweight , while 4.7 % are obese . 7 % of filipinos are physically inactive additionally , the food and nutrition research institute ( fnri ) , in their 2018 expanded national nutrition survey ( enns ) , also said the prevalence rates of adult overweight and obesity are 28.8 % and 9.8 % , respectively . although the researchers only surveyed 8 metro manila cities , they indicated that these figures are already at a national level . interestingly , they also noted an increasing prevalence of physical inactivity among filipino adults . whats causing these concerning facts and figures about being overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity among filipinos ? the top contributing factors for increased diabetes risk reports show that the reasons why filipinos have an increased risk for diabetes are : 1. dependence on electronic gadgets in a review entitled , diabetes care in the philippines , the author mentioned that the rapid urbanization significantly contributes to the rise in the diabetes statistics in the philippines . this is because with urbanization or modernization comes our increasing dependence on electronic gadgets . and although electronic devices bring a lot of information , convenience , and entertainment , they also pose some health risks . for instance , various studies have already noted that excessive use of gadgets like smartphones and laptops can lead to a sedentary lifestyle a significant risk factor for diabetes mellitus . 2. traditional diet of white rice another contributing factor for the filipinos increased risk for diabetes is the traditional diet of white rice . as in most asian countries , rice is one of our food staples . traditionally , filipinos will have at least a cup of rice per meal . our love for rice has even given birth to the famous extra rice and unli rice cultures . the problem is , some studies have already identified that eating white rice regularly can increase our diabetes risk by up to 1.5 % . 3. challenged medical care another contributing factor to the increased risk of diabetes in the philippines is the healthcare system . in the review , diabetes care in the philippines , the author mentioned that our national insurance system does not offer comprehensive diabetes care in a preventive model . moreover , private insurance companies often only have limited diabetes care packages . this challenge in our medical care only means that filipinos often have to rely on out-of-pocket expenses for their diabetes medical needs , like diagnostic tests and daily medications . current diabetes management in the philippines as of now , the doh has been taking measures to curb the rising diabetes statistics in the philippines . the doh ’ s nationwide efforts in preventing and controlling diabetes and its complications include : free diabetes risk screening at barangay health stations , health centers , and local and provincial hospitals . free medications like oral anti-diabetes drugs and insulin to filipinos diagnosed with diabetes empowering the primary healthcare workers on how to manage diabetes properly . but , despite these efforts , researchers understand that the best investment is still prevention . this is because once diagnosed with diabetes , a person already runs the risk of suffering its complications . these diabetes complications can worsen the patients overall health and financial status . key takeaways various reports indicate that the prevalence rate of diabetes in the philippines is steadily rising . according to the who , the related risk factors for diabetes in our country are being overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity . filipinos have increased risk for diabetes mainly due to our increasing dependence on electronic gadgets that lead to a sedentary lifestyle , our attachment to the traditional diet that includes white rice as a food staple , and the challenges that our healthcare system faces when it comes to diabetes care . management tips diabetes management basics if you have been diagnosed with diabetes , there is no need to worry . diabetes can be managed , and people who have either type 1 or type 2 diabetes can live long and healthy lives . tips for diabetes management : 1. make sure to eat healthy . there are no recommended diets for people with diabetes , but its important to eat foods that are low in fat and calories , but high in vitamins and nutrients . a diet high in fruits , vegetables , nuts , whole grains , and olive oil is associated with reduced risk of diabetes . consulting a nutritionist may also help . 2. avoiding eating too many sweets . since you want to keep your blood sugar in check , being careful about your sugar intake is very important . eating sweets would be fine , so long as it is done in moderation , and only in small portions . 3. engage in daily exercise . exercise helps keep your body strong and healthy , and also lowers your blood sugar . this is because when you exercise , your body uses the sugar in your blood and converts it to energy . 4. monitor your blood sugar levels . this is especially important for those diagnosed with type 1 diabetes since it helps you know if your blood sugar is within the ideal range . for type 2 sufferers , it lets you know how well you 're managing your blood sugar . 5. don ’ t forget to take insulin . insulin therapy is necessary for type 1 sufferers , since they will die if they don ’ t take insulin regularly . for type 2 sufferers , it would depend on the doctors recommendation . 6. don ’ t forget your other medication . there are some cases where your doctor will ask you to take other types of medication to help manage your condition . taking these medicines on schedule helps you manage your condition better . diabetes mellitus diabetes mellitus is a chronic and possibly incapacitating condition that is prevalent in the philippines . there are two types of diabetes : type and type 2. type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune , childhood-onset disease wherein an individual does not produce insulin . it affects about 500,000 children 14 years and below and this number is said to be rising by 3 % annually . type 2 diabetes , on the other hand , is a metabolic disorder due to insulin resistance . this type of diabetes is said to affect 20.6 % or one out of every five filipinos who are 30 years old and above . because of the continuous increase of the number of people afflicted with this condition , a lot of attention has been given to its prevention and cure . gene variations that signal disease sequences in diabetes are of special interest to the diabetes study group . specialists are working together to discover the link between genes and the environment that lead to diabetes and its complications . the group has looked at associations between genetic problems ( mutations and polymorphisms ) and diabetes among filipinos . type 2 diabetes mellitus what is it ? type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) is a chronic , metabolic disorder that presents with hyperglycemia , which refers to a condition of elevated sugar levels in the blood . this disease is brought about by abnormalities in the secretion of insulin , which is a vital hormone responsible for the regulation of blood sugar levels . in patients with t2dm , there is also an increase in the production of glucose , or sugar , from the liver . a key phenomenon in t2dm is the presence of insulin resistance , which refers to an impairment in the uptake of glucose in skeletal muscles and peripheral tissues , resulting to hyperglycemia . who are at risk to have it ? some individuals may have an increased risk for developing t2dm . these people are those who are overweight or obese , those with impaired fasting glucose level , those with high levels of triglycerides and those with conditions such as hypertension or a high blood pressure , schizophrenia , acanthosis nigricans and polycystic ovary syndrome . having a sedentary lifestyle is also a risk factor for developing t2dm . women who had a history of diabetes during pregnancy , or gestational diabetes mellitus , have as much as a 60 % lifetime risk of developing type 2 diabetes . a family history of diabetes mellitus is also a risk factor for acquiring t2dm . individuals who are afflicted with these risk factors must be screened for the presence of t2dm in a timely manner . if you do n't have any of the above risk factors , it is recommended for filipinos to be screened starting at the age of 40 years old . what are its symptoms ? commonly , patients with t2dm may not experience any bothersome symptoms and the disease would simply be detected on a routine laboratory examination . individuals with high blood sugar levels may experience increased thirst ( polydipsia ) , more frequent urination ( polyuria ) , and excessive urination at night ( polydipsia ) . weight loss is a sign of uncontrolled diabetes , which reflects the deficiency of insulin . people living with diabetes must be on the look-out for more serious symptoms such as blurring of vision , frothy urine ( bubbly urine ) , tingling sensation of the feeling of having pins and needles on the hands and feet , leg pain and abdominal discomfort and pain because these may be indicative of the presence of the multi-systemic complications of diabetes . wounds that take a long time to heal , especially on the feet , may be found in people with diabetes . how is it diagnosed ? t2dm is diagnosed by requesting laboratory examinations . recommended screening test is fasting blood sugar . if the level is 126 mg/dl ( 7 mmol/l ) or higher on 2 separate occasions is already considered to have t2 dm . other tests that your doctor might request are 75 grams oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) and hb a1c , which is your average blood sugar levels for the past 3 months . how is it treated ? proper nutrition and a healthy lifestyle are crucial pillars in the management of t2 dm . a well-balanced diet consisting mostly of vegetables , legumes , lentils , noodles , rice , bread , grains , and non-sweet fresh fruits , with moderate amounts of protein-rich food such as fish , seafoods , eggs , lean meat , skin-less chicken , low-fat cheese , low-fat yogurt , and nuts . sugar-sweetened beverages and foods that have a high salt , sugar , and fat content should be avoided . a person living with diabetes should not skip meals . exercise is a vital aspect in maintaining a healthy lifestyle for persons with diabetes . moderate intensity exercise , as tolerated by the individual , for about 150 minutes per week , at least thirty minutes per day on most days of the week , is highly recommended . 4 health protocols must be observed when performing such aerobic activity during this time of the covid-19 pandemic . outdoor exercises , such as running , walking , jogging , and biking , are preferred . gardening , which is also a gratifying activity that has become popular during the quarantine period , also helps burn calories . t2dm may be treated by medications in the form of oral anti-hyperglycemic agents , such as metformin , which belongs to the class of drugs called biguanides , sulfonylureas , dipeptidyl-peptidase inhibitors , and other medications such as pioglitazone and acarbose . some patients need to be treated with insulin injections . it is crucial to regularly consult with the doctor so you can be advised on the most appropriate treatment for you . what are its complications ? various organs of the body may be affected by t2dm . in long-standing t2dm , the blood vessels of the eyes may be involved , in a condition called diabetic retinopathy . persons living with t2dm must undergo an eye exam upon diagnosis of their condition . diabetes may also have a detrimental effect on the kidney 's filtering ability , leading to a condition known as diabetic nephropathy . the nerves of the legs and feet may also be damaged as part of the complication of diabetes , and may present as numbness , pain , or tingling sensation of the lower extremities , referred to as diabetic neuropathy . persons living with diabetes should examine their feet daily for the presence of wounds . retinopathy , nephropathy , and neuropathy are all known as microvascular complications of diabetes . diabetes may also cause narrowing of the large blood vessels of the body from inflammation and injury , giving rise to a condition known as atherosclerosis , which fuels the macrovascular complications of diabetes , which can be in the form of heart disease , stroke , or peripheral arterial disease . persons with diabetes should consistently follow-up with their physicians so that they could be regularly monitored for the presence of complications and could be treated in a timely manner . when do you need to see an endocrinologist ? it is recommended that persons with diabetes who have high blood sugar levels , with bothersome symptoms , and complications should see an endocrinologist . those who need insulin therapy would also benefit from an endocrinology consult . type 2 diabetes in the filipino : is it any different ? anyone can get diabetes young or old , rich or poor , male or female , filipino or not . in the philippines , according to the food and nutrition research institute-department of science and technology 8th national nutrition survey , diabetes prevalence based on fasting blood sugar has risen from 3.4 percent in 2003 to 5.4 percent in 2013. the greatest numbers of filipinos with diabetes are 50 to 69 years of age and wealthy and live in urban areas . not surprising since type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) is both a genetic and a lifestyle disease linked to aging , unhealthy diets , physical inactivity , obesity and urbanization . about 90 to 95 percent of people with diabetes have t2 dm . risk factors include : age at or above 30 years , family history of diabetes , high blood pressure , abnormal cholesterol levels , polycystic ovary syndrome , gestational or pregnancy-related diabetes , intake of certain drugs , and sleep deprivation . people who were born premature , too heavy ( > /= 8 pounds ) or too small are also at risk for t2dm . type 2 diabetes is characterized by impairment in insulin secretion or action , which can lead to high blood sugar . high blood sugar can wreak havoc in the body circulation and immune system leading to infections , blindness , kidney failure , leg amputation , heart attacks and strokes . filipinos are especially prone to t2dm compared to other races . in fact , filipinos get diabetes and problems like hypertension , high cholesterol and heart disease at a lower body mass index ( bmi ) compared to caucasians . a person ’ s bmi is calculated by dividing one 's body weight in kilograms by the square of one ’ s height in meters . a bmi of 25 and above is considered overweight for caucasians , while a bmi of 23 and above is the cutoff for asians . one possible reason for the higher t2dm risk is that filipinos have more visceral fat despite having similar bmi or waistlines as their caucasian counterparts . visceral fat is the nasty fat inside the belly stored in or around the internal organs such as the liver , pancreas and intestines , which can lead to defective insulin action . in studies done in north america , filipino migrants have even been found to have higher rates of t2dm compared to other asians such as the japanese , chinese , korean and vietnamese . to add insult to injury , studies suggest that filipinos may also have more diabetes complications like eye and kidney disease compared to other races . but pinoys need not sulk about getting the short end of the stick . filipino or not , you can cut your diabetes risk . just eat right , move more , stay trim , sleep well , stress less and get checked . dr. joy arabelle fontanilla is the past president of the american association of clinical endocrinologists philippine chapter and head of the weight management center , st. lukes medical center-global city . the a to z of health information advocacy is a joint initiative of a group of medical specialists and supported by astra zeneca philippines aimed at raising public awareness on various diseases and providing health information and updates to the healthcare community . why do filipinos have high rates of diabetes ? not-so-fun facts : in the united states , 15.8 % of filipino men as opposed to 6.1 % of the overall male population have type 2 diabetes . filipina women are six times more likely than white women to have type 2 diabetes while controlling for diabetes risk factors . although filipinos have higher rates of obesity a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes compared to the overall u.s. population , even non-obese filipinos are more likely to acquire type 2 diabetes . overconsumption of refined carbohydrates i.e . , white rice can raise blood glucose levels and increase the risk of type 2 diabetes . however , qualitative studies have found that filipinos who reduce white rice intake are socially viewed as rejecting filipino culture . these findings exemplify how difficult it is for filipinos to make the necessary dietary changes to reduce their risk of type 2 diabetes . a simple way to help keep blood glucose stable is to fill your plate with 50 % veggies , 25 % rice , and 25 % protein . the filipino guide to natural diabetes management resiliency , hospitality , and strong family ties are some of the most vivid qualities of the typical filipino . but i believe there is no filipino trait more unparalleled than their love for food no wonder headlines have it that the philippines is a diabetes hotspot in the pacific . the number of diabetes cases in the country is climbing up each year as many of our countrymen are spending a lot of money and energy on maintenance therapy for it . many of the drugs are available and accessible , but many are their adverse effects and costs , too . this is why a portion of our population still believes and depends on natural therapy . although the newest medicines in the market are potent and promising , natural therapy can ( and may ) also be good and effective even modern science is a witness to this . here are a few ideas on beating diabetes the natural and non-chemical way : aloe vera even your teenage daughter or your niece in eighth grade knows that aloe vera is in her everyday hair shampoo or in her favorite skin care product . but do they or even you know that it may also help your 60-year-old mom with her diabetes ? according to studies , aloe vera has the potential of lowering blood sugar and boosting up insulin . in the market , aloe vera for diabetes comes in powders , extracts , and juices . cinnamon it may be your typical spice in the kitchen , but it may also be your next step in beating diabetes . studies have it that cinnamon can reduce sugar levels as well as lower body mass , body fat , and blood pressure ( which are very known risk factors of the disease ) . visit your doctor and talk to them about taking cinnamon as your everyday supplement for diabetes . bitter gourd is not a kid 's usual vegetable of choice , but it is and should be on the diet of any diabetic filipino out there . bitter gourd or ampalaya in filipino is one of 10 philippine herbal medicines . it is also a known supplement for diabetes due to its properties of reducing sugar levels and improving sugar tolerance . bitter is the taste , but better is the diabetic patient with this veggie on his or her menu . fenugreek an ingredient in cuisines , a component of feeds , a medicine to man , fenugreek is one of the world 's all-purpose herbs with all-around functions , especially in managing diabetes . it is known to bring down sugar digestion , increase insulin levels , and decrease the amount of cholesterol in the body . you can grab it in the market and drink it as tea , eat it as food , or gulp it as a capsule to keep your sugar levels on the right track . this herb is a newbie in the market . one interesting thing worth remembering about gymnema is that it means sugar destroyer in hindi . it is a great help in dealing with diabetes as it reduces sugar cravings , lowers sugar levels , increases insulin production , and fights the aggravating factors of the disease . this sugar destroyer is available in stores as a supplement in different capsule forms . 6. ginseng from the ancient era of kings and emperors to this present time of smartphones and social media , ginseng has always been a legendary plant with equally legendary health benefits . it is a popular and proven antioxidant and booster of immunity , energy and brain functions . as a diabetes supplement , it improves and enhances insulin production , sugar uptake , and pancreatic function and it comes in the form of tea , food , and pharmaceutical products in the market . serpentina another herb in folk medicine that has been addressing several ailments in the community is serpentina . studies show that this plant is able to carry out a multitude of actions in the human body , one of which is its antidiabetic power . it is easily and readily at hand in the form of supplements at your nearest drugstores . the king of bitters these seven plants are just tidbits of the hundreds of natural products out there claiming and proving themselves to be treatments and preventions of various sicknesses , from the simplest colds to the severest cancer . with a lot of choices on the list , which one is a really good deal for diabetes ? andrographis paniculata , like any other herbal product out there , is known and believed to have a wide range of effects for a wide range of sicknesses . simply known as serpentina , sinta , or king of bitters , it is a plant hailing from southeast asia with india and sri lanka as its primary native homes . it is a branched herb with a life cycle of one year and a height of half to one meter , having green and lanceolate leaves . serpentina has been in traditional medicine for many years , preventing and addressing infection , inflammation , and cancer . studies have it that this plant is a useful aid in diarrhea , diabetes , and conditions of the kidney and the liver . it has antioxidant , anti-fever , and immunostimulant effects in the human body , causing its ability to combat and prevent different maladies . so how does serpentina exactly work its magic on diabetes ? or the better question is , can serpentina really work its magic on diabetes ? there is actually a sufficient number of researches supporting the effectiveness of this plant in lowering blood sugar levels in the body . this action of serpentina is due to andrographolide . this substance is responsible for improving sugar uptake by adipose tissues , hinders the liver from making sugar , and halts the intestine from taking it in . all these actions of the andrographolide boil down to a subsequent decrease in the level of sugar in the blood , which is the main goal of therapy in treating any diabetic patient . on top of science is the rich history of the plant . serpentina has a huge part in traditional asian medicine the use of it is prevalent and patronized in india , sri lanka , pakistan , malaysia , indonesia , china , and thailand . it is also a common herbal remedy in the ayurvedic and unani systems of medicine . as a result , a lot of medicinal products containing serpentina are out in the market , sold and bought for its antidiabetic ability . a large chunk of these herbal preparations come in the form of powders and capsules for easy and quick consumption . how to manage and prevent diabetes for filipinos ? diabetes is a disease that impacts in 5 people in the philippines . worldwide , about 537 million adults aged 20 to 79 years old are affected a number expected to increase by 50 % in 20 years . it has afflicted over a million young people who are 19 years old and below , and nearly half of diabetic adults remain undiagnosed due to lack of information about this disease . diabetes management : you may wonder , how does living with the disease feel like ? since the causes of type 1 and 2 diabetes differ , so do their management . people with type 1 diabetes , where the pancreas can no longer produce insulin . the patient will have to administer the hormone externally for energy and blood glucose control . doctors will pick from 5 types of insulin rapid-acting , short-acting , intermediate-acting , long-acting , and premix and recommend their dose and frequency . while type 2 diabetes may also require insulin at a later stage , treatment usually starts out with dietary and lifestyle intervention ( improving their eating habits and embarking on an exercise program ) . if changes in diet becomes inadequate in managing blood sugar levels , then oral medication will be prescribed to manage blood sugar levels . diabetic diet : diabetic patients should follow the treatment solutions prescribed by their doctor to actively manage the disease and reduce the risk of complications . all patients should follow dietary treatment . as different people have varying calorie requirements , patients should consult a registered dietician to design a suitable menu for the management of the disease and stabilizing glucose . the general guidelines are as follows : have a balanced diet and have your meals at a regular time . also , dieticians and doctors may also advise patients eat less per meal but have more meals . this helps in stabilizing blood glucose levels . your diet should have a healthy and appropriate mix of carbohydrates . carbohydrates should be approximately 50 % of the total calorie intake . for example , around 750 kcal of calories ( equivalent to around 188g carbohydrate , i.e . , of 18 - 19 portions of carbohydrate exchange ) to be produced by carbohydrate in a 1500 kcal menu . the above carbohydrate exchange should be distributed evenly in main meals and snack time . 1 portion of carbohydrate exchange is equivalent to 10g of carbohydrate . patients can choose suitable number of grains , rhizome vegetables , fruits , and dairy according to the carbohydrate exchange method . dietary counselling would include emphasis on the avoidance of food and drinks that are rich in sugar or additional sweeteners to prevent surge of glucose as much as possible . foods that are high in saturated fat content such as animal organs should also be avoided to protect the cardiovascular system . abstinence of alcohol should also be followed as alcohol consumption can affect the efficacy of drugs and may lead to low blood glucose ( hypoglycemia ) . in unavoidable circumstances , men and women should limit themselves to 2 and 1 portions respectively . each portion works out to be 300ml of beer , 150ml of red wine , or 45ml of spirit , depending on one 's choice of a nightcap . oral anti-diabetic drugs ( oad ) : the prescriptions of oral anti-diabetic drugs will be given by doctor according to the body condition , drug allergies ( if any ) and condition of blood glucose control of individual patient . type : sulfonylureas function : stimulate the insulin secretion of pancreas example : tolbutamide , gliclazide , gliclazide mr , glimepiride , glipizide type : biguanides function : reduce the production of glucose in liver , increase the application of glucose by body tissue ( muscles ) and reduce the absorption of glucose in gastrointestinal tract example : metformin , metformin xr type : glucosidase inhibitors function : slow down the absorption of dextrose in small intestine to prevent too much glucose after meals example : acarbose type : glitazones function : increase the sensitivity of body to insulin so glucose would enter the cells and decrease the glucose level . example : pioglitazone type : dipeptidyl peptidase-4 enzyme inhibitors function : stimulate the insulin secretion of pancreas example : sitagliptin , vildagliptin , linagliptin , saxagliptin , alogliptin type : meglitinides or glinides function : stimulate the insulin secretion of pancreas example : repaglinide type : sglt2-inhibitors function : inhibit reabsorption of glucose in the kidney and lower blood sugar , e.g . , empagliflozin , dapagliflozin example : dapagliflozin , empagliflozin , canagliflozin insulin injections for diabetes : insulin is a hormone required by the body to use glucose for energy and helps balance your blood glucose levels . for type 1dm and late-stage type 2dm where the pancreas can longer produce insulin , diabetics would have to administer insulin externally to help regulate blood sugar levels . injection of insulin is a way similar to the normal secretion of insulin to manage glucose . this treatment is applied to type 1 patients and some of the type 2 patients whose glucose level can not be managed after application of oral hypoglycemic medications . injection of insulin can be classified into 5 durations of action of insulin , it would be rapid acting , short acting , intermediate acting , long acting and pre-mix insulin . the doctors will generally decide the type , dose of insulin and the frequency of injection required , and the injection can be done by the patients themselves after training . diabetes complications : if not well managed , the continued presence of high sugar levels in the bloodstream can lead to complications over time . the complications differ from those suffering from type 1 and type 2 diabetes . acute complications of type 1 diabetes : type 1 diabetes sufferers tend to experience the consequences of high glucose levels quickly as compared to type 2 diabetics . leaving high blood sugar levels to chance jeopardizes the metabolism of fat and protein , which doesn ’ t bode well , especially for type 1 diabetics . where insulin is scarce , the body breaks fat down into fuel . this creates a buildup of ketone bodies which can potentially cause ketoacidosis and life-threatening cases of diabetic coma . patients could also experience glycosuria , where sugars are passed out during urination ; as well as excessive urination ( polyuria ) and extreme thirst ( polydipsia ) arising from dehydration and electrolyte imbalance . chronic complications for type 2 diabetes : the complications of type 2 diabetes , on the other hand , put systems and organs at risk of destruction . as high blood sugar levels persist , patients are more vulnerable to cardiovascular diseases , kidney failure , or damage to one ’ s tissues and nerves . the latter can result in retinopathy leading to visual impairment and foot diseases such as ulcers , infections , and gangrene which may warrant lower limb amputation . unsurprisingly , foot care is a big part of living with type 2 diabetes . maintaining foot hygiene is the bare minimum , along with regular examination lest cuts and wounds on numb limbs go undetected . for the same reason , patients should never go barefoot , trim their toenails with care , and have calluses removed professionally . exercise should be limited to feet-friendly activities and investing in footwear that fits well and promotes blood circulation will prove worthwhile . diabetes prevention : as the saying goes , an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of care . living with diabetes is a huge undertaking , and its wiser to be more proactive than reactive . regular exercise and dietary management are two cornerstones of diabetes prevention , but what do these look like in practice ? for adults get 75 and 150 minutes of exercise of moderate and vigorous intensities respectively per week . that said , those who are gunning for a healthy bmi could use more activity . during mealtimes , choose complex over processed carbohydrates ; poultry , fish , and plant-based protein over red meat ; and water , coffee , and tea over sugary drinks . home-cooked meals are also a good idea if you ’ re using healthier fats and oils made with olives , avocados , and nuts . aside from working out and eating well , here are 3 other lifestyle adjustments that will keep you out of the woods . understanding diabetes : the bad news is that there ’ s no proven cure for diabetes . the good news ? prediabetes can be mitigated . as you would have learned by now , blood sugar levels sit front and center in diabetes management , treatment , and prevention . now that you know the risks , causes , and manifestations of diabetes , you can be more conscious about your diet , exercise regime , and health screenings . chronic illnesses like diabetes can turn critical because of possible complications and lifetime management . whether you ’ re at risk or not , being financially prepared is key to protecting your savings and investments from being wiped out in case of illness . aside from philhealth and hmo , you can add products such as sunfit and well to help cover the costs of prevention , diagnosis , recovery , and treatment . you may also ask a sun life financial advisor to know more health protection plans that fit your budget . type 2 diabetes is a condition that happens because of a problem in the way the body regulates and uses sugar as a fuel . that sugar also is called glucose . this long-term condition results in too much sugar circulating in the blood . eventually , high blood sugar levels can lead to disorders of the circulatory , nervous and immune systems . in type 2 diabetes , there are primarily two problems . the pancreas does not produce enough insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into the cells . and cells respond poorly to insulin and take in less sugar . type 2 diabetes used to be known as adult-onset diabetes , but both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can begin during childhood and adulthood . type 2 is more common in older adults . but the increase in the number of children with obesity has led to more cases of type 2 diabetes in younger people . there 's no cure for type 2 diabetes . losing weight , eating well and exercising can help manage the disease . if diet and exercise are n't enough to control blood sugar , diabetes medications or insulin therapy may be recommended . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a chronic illness that is a result of having excessive glucose ( sugar ) in your bloodstream . the primary cause of this disease is when the pancreas is unable to produce enough insulin to regulate glucose levels which in turn causes a spike in your blood sugar . having diabetes can put you at risk for other chronic ailments like heart disease , vision problems , and even impotence in men . what are the kinds of diabetes ? type 1 diabetes is also known as insulin-dependent diabetes or juvenile diabetes . this is considered to be more dangerous than type 2 diabetes and typically occurs in children and young adults . while the exact cause of type 1 diabetes is still unknown , family medical history can also be a risk factor in 10 % to 15 % of patients diagnosed with type 1 diabetes . those with other known autoimmune hormone-related diseases are also prone to developing this type of diabetes . meanwhile , those with type 2 diabetes or adult-onset diabetes are usually diagnosed after the age of 40. about 90 % to 95 % of those with diabetes have this kind of diabetes . according to some studies , type 2 diabetes has slowly become one of the fastest growing epidemics in this modern age . obese children are also at risk of developing this type of diabetes as unhealthy food options are more readily accessible and affordable for the masses . common symptoms you should consider consulting your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms which may indicate early signs of diabetes like : unexpected weight loss slow healing wounds blurred vision frequent urination unexplained fatigue how do you get diagnosed ? your doctor may perform blood tests to measure and determine the type of diabetes and the severity of your condition . a urine test may also be necessary to see if there are any abnormalities in your ketone levels which is usually a result of low insulin levels in your blood . general disclaimer always consults your doctor before drinking any kind of medication , including vitamins . keep in mind that your physician is in the best position to prescribe the right kind of treatment for your condition . immediately stop using a product if you experience negative side effects . type 2 diabetes ( t2dm ) type 2 diabetes , or t2dm is the most common form of diabetes mellitus . where type 1 diabetes occurs due to a lack of insulin secretion in the body , type 2 diabetes is caused by the inefficient use of insulin or faulty signaling in the cells , also known as insulin resistance . common symptoms of type 2 diabetes t2dm is also known as a silent disease with less noticeable symptoms , especially in the very beginning . overtime , the symptoms that appear share some similarities with type 1 diabetes . if your blood glucose level has been high for a prolonged period of time , these are the symptoms that may appear . yeast infections yeast thrives off glucose . A high blood glucose level is conducive for yeast to thrive , resulting in yeast infections . these infections can grow in any warm , moist fold of skin such as between fingers and toes , under the breasts and in or around sex organs . slow-healing sores or wounds prolonged periods of high blood sugar can also affect your blood flow . this causes nerve damage that makes it hard for your body to regenerate and heal from cuts and other wounds . pain or numbness in the feet or legs pain and numbness in your lower limbs may also be another sign of nerve damage . causes of type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes is largely a product of weight gain from a rich diet and sedentary lifestyle . other risk factors include age and family history of diabetes , though these play a smaller role . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes and prevent some of the serious problems diabetes can cause . the more you know , the better you can manage your diabetes . share this booklet with your family and friends so they will understand more about diabetes . also make sure to ask your health care team any questions you might have . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . your pancreas an organ , located between your stomach and spine , that helps with digestion releases a hormone it makes , called insulin , into your blood . insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your body cells . sometimes your body does n't make enough insulin or the insulin does n't work the way it should . glucose then stays in your blood and does n't reach your cells . your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . what is prediabetes ? prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . with prediabetes , your chances of getting type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke are higher . with some weight loss and moderate physical activity , you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you can even return to normal glucose levels , possibly without taking any medicines . caution : take steps to prevent type 2 diabetes now . prediabetes diabetes normal what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? the signs and symptoms of diabetes are being very thirsty urinating often feeling very hungry feeling very tired losing weight without trying sores that heal slowly dry , itchy skin feelings of pins and needles in your feet losing feeling in your feet blurry eyesight some people with diabetes do n't have any of these signs or symptoms . the only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test . what kind of diabetes do you have ? the three main types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . people can develop diabetes at any age . both women and men can develop diabetes . type 1 diabetes type 1 diabetes , which used to be called juvenile diabetes , develops most often in young people ; however , type 1 diabetes can also develop in adults . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin because the body 's immune system , which normally protects you from infection by getting rid of bacteria , viruses , and other harmful substances , has attacked and destroyed the cells that make insulin . treatment for type 1 diabetes includes taking shots , also called injections , of insulin . sometimes taking medicines by mouth . making healthy food choices . being physically active . controlling your blood pressure levels . blood pressure is the force of blood flow inside your blood vessels . controlling your cholesterol levels . cholesterol is a type of fat in your body 's cells , in your blood , and in many foods . type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes , which used to be called adult-onset diabetes , can affect people at any age , even children . however , type 2 diabetes develops most often in middle- aged and older people . people who are overweight and inactive are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance condition that occurs when fat , muscle , and liver cells do not use insulin to carry glucose into the body 's cells to use for energy . as a result , the body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas keeps up with the added demand by making more insulin . over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . if your pancreas can no longer make enough insulin , you will need to treat your type 2 diabetes . treatment for type 2 diabetes includes using diabetes medicines making healthy food choices being physically active controlling your blood pressure levels controlling your cholesterol levels gestational diabetes gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . all women have insulin resistance late in their pregnancy . if the pancreas does n't make enough insulin during pregnancy , a woman develops gestational diabetes . overweight or obese women have a higher chance of gestational diabetes . also , gaining too much weight during pregnancy may increase your likelihood of developing gestational diabetes . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . however , a woman who has had gestational diabetes is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes later in life . babies born to mothers who had gestational diabetes are also more likely to develop obesity and type 2 diabetes . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what i need to know about gestational diabetes at why do you need to take care of your diabetes ? over time , diabetes can lead to serious problems with your blood vessels , heart , nerves , kidneys , mouth , eyes , and feet . these problems can lead to an amputation , which is surgery to remove a damaged toe , foot , or leg , for example . the most serious problem caused by diabetes is heart disease . when you have diabetes , you are more than twice as likely as people without diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke . with diabetes , you may not have the usual signs or symptoms of a heart attack . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . who is part of your health care team ? most people with diabetes get care from primary care providers , such as internists , family physicians , or pediatricians . a team of health care providers can also improve your diabetes care . in addition to a primary care provider , your health care team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care a dietitian , a nurse , or a certified diabetes educator experts who can provide information about managing diabetes a counselor or mental health professional a pharmacist a dentist an ophthalmologist or an optometrist for eye care a podiatrist for foot care if diabetes makes you feel sad or angry , or if you have other problems that worry you , you should talk with a counselor or mental health professional . your doctor or certified diabetes educator can help you find a counselor . talk with your doctor about what vaccines and immunizations , or shots , you should get to keep from getting sick . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . be sure you understand everything you need to know about taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . take care of your diabetes each day do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . these things may seem like a lot to do at first . just make small changes until these steps become a normal part of your day . follow your healthy eating plan ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . this plan , often called medical nutrition therapy , will include regular monitoring by your dietitian and education about how to adjust your eating habits as the need occurs . medical nutrition therapy is usually covered by insurance or medicare as long as your doctor refers you . your dietitian can help you plan meals that include foods that you and your family like and that are good for you . your healthy eating plan will include breads , cereals , rice , and whole grains fruits and vegetables meat and meat substitutes dairy products healthy fats your plan will also help you learn how to eat the right amount , or portions , of food . making good food choices will help you reach and stay at a healthy weight keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels under control prevent heart and blood vessel disease if you take insulin , look at the white boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . do n't skip meals , especially if you 've already taken your insulin , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . learn more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . if you dont take insulin , look at the blue boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you do n't take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . do n't skip meals , especially if you take diabetes medicines , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . read more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . eat several small meals during the day instead of big meals . read more about healthy eating plans in what i need to know about eating and diabetes at be physically active physical activity helps you stay healthy . physical activity is especially good if you have diabetes because it helps you reach or stay at a healthy weight helps insulin work better to lower your blood glucose levels is good for your heart and lungs gives you more energy even small amounts of physical activity help manage diabetes , such as when you are physically active at work or home . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . not all physical activity has to take place at the same time . increase daily activity by decreasing time spent watching tv or at the computer . children and adolescents should limit screen time not related to school to less than 2 hours a day . limiting screen time can help you meet your physical activity goal . people with diabetes should always talk with a doctor before starting a new physical activity program . do aerobic activities , such as brisk walking , which use the body 's large muscles to make the heart beat faster . the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head , shoulder , and hip movements . do activities to strengthen muscles and bone , such as sit-ups or lifting weights . aim for two times a week . stretch to increase flexibility , lower stress , and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity . many activities can help your child and your family stay active and have fun . consider activities that they might enjoy and can stick with , such as playing basketball dancing to music with friends taking a walk or a bike ride physical activity helps you stay healthy . action steps if you take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . don ’ t start a physical activity program when your blood glucose levels are high or if you have ketones in your blood or urine . read more about ketones in the section monitor your diabetes . do n't be physically active right before you go to bed because it could cause low blood glucose while you sleep . action steps if you do n't take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . ask your doctor about whether you need to eat before you are physically active . when you are being physically active , carry glucose tablets or a carbohydrate-rich snack or drink with you , such as fruit or juice , in case your blood glucose levels go too low . read more about increasing your physical activity in what i need to know about physical activity and diabetes at take your medicines as prescribed if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . diabetes medicines most people with type 2 diabetes use medicines other than insulin shots . people with type 2 diabetes use medicine to help their blood glucose levels stay in their target range . if your body makes insulin and the insulin does n't lower your blood glucose levels enough , you may need to take one or more medicines . diabetes medicines come in pill and shot form . some people take diabetes medicines once a day and other medicines more often . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . sometimes , people who take diabetes medicines may also need insulin shots for a while . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . if you get sick or have surgery , your diabetes medicines may no longer work to lower your blood glucose levels . always check with your doctor before you stop taking your diabetes medicines . insulin shots only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take and which of the following ways to take insulin is best for you : insulin shot . you 'll use a needle attached to a syringe a hollow tube with a plunger that you fill with a dose of insulin . some people use an insulin pen , a pen like device with a needle and a cartridge of insulin . never share insulin needles or insulin pens , even with family . insulin pump . an insulin pump is a small device filled with insulin that you wear on your belt or keep in your pocket . the pump connects to a small , plastic tube and a small needle . you or your doctor inserts the needle under your skin . the needle can stay in for several days . insulin jet injector . this device sends a fine spray of insulin through your skin with high-pressure air instead of a needle . insulin injection port . you or your doctor inserts a small tube just beneath your skin , where it remains in place for several days . you can inject insulin into the end of the tube instead of through your skin . read more about ways to take insulin in alternative devices for taking insulin at only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take . other medicines your doctor may prescribe other medicines to help with problems related to diabetes , such as aspirin for heart health cholesterol-lowering medicines for high blood pressure remembering to take your medicines at the correct times each day can be challenging . many people find that keeping a weekly pill box with separate boxes for each day , and even separate boxes for morning and evening , can help . also ask your health care team to update your list of medicines at each visit so you always have an accurate list of what medicines to take and when . read more about diabetes and medicines in what I need to know about diabetes medicines at monitor your diabetes check your blood glucose levels checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . if your blood has too much or too little glucose , you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . a member of your health care team will show you how to check your blood glucose levels using a blood glucose meter . your health care team can teach you how to prick your finger to get a drop of blood for testing use your meter to find out your blood glucose level from your drop of blood read more in continuous glucose monitoring at your health insurance or medicare may pay for the blood glucose meter and test strips you need . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check before and after eating , before and after physical activity , before bed , and sometimes in the middle of the night . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . target range for blood glucose levels most people with diabetes should try to keep their blood glucose levels as close as possible to the level of someone who doesnt have diabetes . this normal target range is about 70 to 130. the closer to normal your blood glucose levels are , the lower your chance of developing serious health problems . ask your doctor what your target levels are and when you should check your blood glucose levels with a meter . make copies of the chart in the section your diabetes care records to take with you when you visit your doctor . reaching your target range all of the time can be hard . remember , the closer you get to your target range , the better you will feel . the a1 c test another test for blood glucose , the a1 c also called the hemoglobin a1 c test , hb a1 c , or glycohemoglobin testis a blood test that reflects the average level of glucose in your blood during the past 2 to 3 months . you should have the a1 c test at least twice a year . if your result is not on target , your doctor may have you take the test more often to see if your a1 c improves . for the test , your doctor will draw a sample of your blood during an office visit or send you to a lab to have your blood drawn . your a1 c test result is given as a percentage . your a1 c result plus the record of your blood glucose numbers show whether your blood glucose levels are under control . if your a1 c result is too high , you may need to change your diabetes treatment plan . your health care team can help you decide what part of your plan to change . if your a1 c result is on target , then your diabetes treatment plan is working . the lower your a1 c result , the lower your chance of having diabetes problems . talk with your doctor about what your a1 c target should be . your personal target may be above or below the target shown in the chart . a1 c targets target for most people with diabetes below 7 percent time to change my diabetes care plan 8 percent or above a1 c targets can also depend on how long you have had diabetes whether or not you have other health problems read more about a1 c targets at tests for ketones you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. your body makes ketones when you burn fat instead of glucose for energy . if you have too many ketones , you are more likely to have a serious condition called ketoacidosis . if not treated , ketoacidosis can cause death . signs of ketoacidosis are vomiting weakness fast breathing sweet-smelling breath ketoacidosis is more likely in people with type 1 diabetes . your doctor or diabetes educator will show you how to test for ketones . keep daily records make copies of the daily diabetes record at the end of this booklet . then , write down the results of your blood glucose checks each day . you may also want to record what you ate , how you felt , and whether you were physically active . bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . they can use your records to see whether you need changes in your diabetes medicines or in your healthy eating plan . action steps if you take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take insulin the amount and type of insulin you take what types of physical activity you do and for how long when and what you eat whether you have ketones in your blood or urine when you are sick action steps if you do n't take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take your medicines what types of physical activity you do and for how long learn about high and low blood glucose levels sometimes , no matter how hard you try to keep your blood glucose levels in your target range , they will be too high or too low . blood glucose that 's too high or too low can make you feel sick . if you try to control your high or low blood glucose and cant , you may become even sicker and need help . talk with your doctor to learn how to handle these emergencies . learn about high blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . see the chart on page 54. high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . high blood glucose can happen if you miss taking your diabetes medicines eat too much do n't get enough physical activity have an infection get sick are stressed take medicines that can cause high blood glucose be sure to tell your doctor about other medicines you take . when you 're sick , be sure to check your blood glucose levels and keep taking your diabetes medicines . read more about how to take care of yourself when you 're sick in the section take care of your diabetes during special times or events . signs that your blood glucose levels may be too high are the following : feeling thirsty feeling weak or tired headaches urinating often having trouble paying attention blurry vision yeast infections very high blood glucose may also make you feel sick to your stomach . if your blood glucose levels are high much of the time , or if you have symptoms of high blood glucose , call your doctor . you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . learn about low blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . low blood glucose can come on fast and can be caused by taking too much diabetes medicine missing or delaying a meal being more physically active than usual drinking alcoholic beverages sometimes , medicines you take for other health problems can cause your blood glucose levels to drop . signs your blood glucose levels may be too low are the following : hunger dizziness or shakiness confusion being pale sweating more weakness anxiety or moodiness headaches a fast heartbeat if your blood glucose levels drop lower , you could have severe hypoglycemia , where you pass out or have a seizure . a seizure occurs when cells in the brain release a rush of energy that can cause changes in behavior or muscle contractions . some seizures are life threatening . if you have any of these symptoms , check your blood glucose levels . if your blood glucose levels are less than 70 , have one of the following right away : three or four glucose tablets one serving of glucose gel . the amount equal to 15 grams of carbohydrates 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of fruit juice 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of a regular non diet soft drink 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of milk five or six pieces of hard candy 1 tablespoon of sugar , syrup , or honey have one of these foods or drinks when your blood glucose levels are low . after 15 minutes , check your blood glucose levels again . repeat these steps until your blood glucose levels are 70 or above . if it will be at least 1 hour before your next meal , eat a snack . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . a glucagon kit has a vial of glucagon , a syringe , and a needle to inject the glucagon . given as a shot , the glucagon quickly raises blood glucose . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you 'll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon kit is not available . action steps if you take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor if you 've passed out from low blood glucose . ask your doctor about glucagon . glucagon is a medicine that raises blood glucose . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . when you have severe hypoglycemia , someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon shot is not available . action steps if you do n't take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor about other medicines you are taking . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicines might cause low blood glucose . read more about low blood glucose in hypoglycemia at tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of day or night , several times in a row . prevent diabetes problems taking care of your diabetes every day will help your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels stay in your target ranges . caring for your diabetes can also help prevent other health problems over the years . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . types of diabetes problems diabetes problems can damage parts of the body such as the heart blood vessels eyes kidneys nerves heart and blood vessel disease can lead to heart attacks and strokes . nerve damage can lead to a loss of feeling in the feet , which may lead to an amputation . you will want to take steps to prevent these diabetes problems . read more about preventing diabetes problems in the following booklets at these booklets are also available in Spanish and large-print versions : prevent diabetes problems : keep your diabetes under control prevent diabetes problems : keep your eyes healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your feet healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your heart and blood vessels healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your kidneys healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your mouth healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your nervous system healthy take care of your diabetes during special times or events diabetes is part of your life . you can learn how to take care of yourself and your diabetes when you 're sick , when you 're at school or work , when you 're away from home , when an emergency or a natural disaster happens , or when you 're thinking about having a baby or are pregnant . when you 're sick having a cold , the flu , or an infection can raise your blood glucose levels . being sick puts stress on your body . your body releases hormones to deal with the stress and to fight the sickness . higher hormone levels can also cause high blood glucose levels . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . the first step is to talk with your health care team and write down how often to check your blood glucose levels whether you should check for ketones in your blood or urine whether you should change your usual dose of your diabetes medicines what to eat and drink when to call your doctor action steps if you take insulin take your insulin , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . ask your health care team about how to adjust your insulin dose based on your blood glucose test results . action steps if you do n't take insulin take your diabetes medicines , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . people who are sick sometimes feel as though they cant eat as much or cant keep food down , which can cause low blood glucose levels . consuming carbohydrate-rich drinks or snacks can help prevent low blood glucose . if you are sick , your health care team may recommend the following : check your blood glucose levels at least four times a day and write down the results in your record book . keep your results handy so you can report the results to your health care team . keep taking your diabetes medicines , even if you cant eat . drink at least 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of water or other calorie-free , caffeine-free liquid every hour while you 're awake . if you cant eat your usual food , try eating or drinking any of the following to prevent low blood glucose levels : juice saltine crackers dry toast soup broth or bouillon ice pops or sherbet gelatin that is n't sugar-free milk yogurt soda that is n't sugar-free your doctor may ask that you call right away if your blood glucose levels are above 240 even though you 've taken your diabetes medicines your urine or blood ketone levels are above normal you vomit more than once you have diarrhea for more than 6 hours you have trouble breathing you have a high fever you cant think clearly or you feel more drowsy than usual you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . when you 're at school or work take care of your diabetes when you 're at school or at work : follow your healthy eating plan . take your medicines and check your blood glucose levels as usual . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . keep snacks nearby and carry some with you at all times to treat low blood glucose . if you have trained diabetes staff at your school or work , tell them that you have diabetes . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . when you 're away from home these tips can help you when you 're away from home : get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . follow your healthy eating plan as much as possible when you eat out . always carry a snack with you in case you have to wait for a waiter to serve you . limit alcoholic beverages . ask your health care team how many alcoholic beverages you can safely drink . eat something when you drink to prevent low blood glucose . if you 're taking a long trip by car , check your blood glucose levels before driving . stop and check your blood glucose levels every 2 hours . always carry your diabetes medicines and supplies in the car where you can reach them in case your blood glucose levels drop too low . in case you cant leave for home on time , bring twice the amount of diabetes supplies and medicines you normally need . take comfortable , well-fitting shoes on vacation . you 'll probably be walking more than usual . keep your medical insurance card , emergency phone numbers , and a first aid kit handy . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . if you 're going to be away for a long time , ask your doctor for a written prescription for your diabetes medicines and the name of a doctor in the place you 're going to visit . do n't count on buying extra supplies when you 're traveling , especially if you 're going to another country . different countries use different kinds of diabetes medicines . when you 're flying on a plane these tips can help you when you 're flying on a plane : ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines , especially your insulin , if you 're traveling across time zones . take a letter from your doctor stating you have diabetes . the letter should include a list of all the medical supplies and medicines you need on the plane . in the letter , the doctor should also include a list of any devices that should n't go through an x-ray machine . carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . if you use an insulin pump , ask airport security to check the device by hand . x-ray machines can damage insulin pumps , whether the pump is on your body or in your luggage . when on a plane , get up from your seat and walk around when possible . read more about planning for travel and travel safety if you have diabetes in have diabetes . will travel . at bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . action steps if you take insulin when you travel , take a special insulated bag to carry your insulin to keep it from freezing or getting too hot bring extra supplies for taking insulin and testing your blood glucose levels in case of loss or breakage ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for taking insulin and testing blood glucose action steps if you do n't take insulin when you travel , ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines if you 're traveling across time zones carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for testing blood glucose when an emergency or a natural disaster happens everyone with diabetes should be prepared for emergencies and natural disasters , such as power outages or hurricanes . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes , such as a blood glucose meter , lancets , and testing strips your diabetes medicines insulin , syringes , and an insulated bag to keep insulin cool , if you take insulin a glucagon kit if you take insulin or if recommended by your doctor glucose tablets and other food or drinks to treat low blood glucose antibiotic cream or ointment a copy of your medical information , including a list of your conditions , medicines , and recent lab test results a list of your prescription names with dosage information and prescription numbers from your pharmacy phone numbers for the American red cross and other disaster relief groups you also might want to include some food that does n't spoil , such as canned or dried food , along with bottled water . read more about preparing for an emergency at the centers for disease control and prevention emergency preparedness and you website at preparedness . if you 're a woman and planning a pregnancy keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . even before you become pregnant , your blood glucose levels should be close to the normal range . your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you 're already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . you can take steps to bring your blood glucose levels close to normal . your insulin needs may change when you 're pregnant . your doctor may want you to take more insulin and check your blood glucose levels more often . if you plan to have a baby , work with your health care team to get your blood glucose levels as close to the normal range as possible see a doctor who has experience taking care of pregnant women with diabetes do n't smoke , drink alcoholic beverages , or use harmful drugs follow your healthy eating plan be sure to have your eyes , heart and blood vessels , blood pressure , and kidneys checked . your doctor should also check for nerve damage . pregnancy can make some health problems worse . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what I need to know about preparing for pregnancy if I have diabetes at your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you 're already pregnant , see your doctor right away . your diabetes care records make copies of the charts in this section . these charts list important things you should discuss with your doctor at each visit . things to discuss with your health care team at each visit date : whom you visited : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood glucose levels share your blood glucose records . your doctor will ask how you are checking your blood glucose levels to make sure you are doing it right . mention if you often have low or high blood glucose . Shared blood glucose records ? checked meter ? practiced blood glucose reading ? shared high or low blood glucose ? your weight talk about how much you should weigh . talk about ways to reach your target weight that will work for you.my weight now is . my target weight is . steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood pressure ask about ways to reach your target . the target for most people with diabetes is below 140/80 unless your doctor helps you set a different target . my blood pressure now is . my target blood pressure is . steps to take : your medicines talk about any problems you have had with your medicines . ask if you should take a low-dose aspirin every day to lower your chance of getting heart disease . Shared medicine problems ? take aspirin ? yes no steps to take : your feet ask to have your feet checked for problems . talk about any problems you are having with your feet , such as numbness , tingling , or sores that heal slowly . Checked feet ? shared problems ? steps to help with my feet : your physical activity plan talk about how often you are physically active , the type of physical activity you do , and any problems you have when being physically active . shared activities ? steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your healthy eating plan talk about what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat . shared eating habits ? steps to take : your feelings if you feel stressed , ask about ways to cope . talk about whether you are feeling sad . Shared stress and problems ? steps to take : your smoking if you smoke , ask for help with quitting . shared smoking habits ? steps to take : this chart lists important tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year . tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year test instructions results or dates a1 ctest have this blood test at least twice a year . your result will tell you what your average blood glucose level was for the past 2 to 3 months . get a blood test to check your total cholesterol aim for below 200 ldl , or bad , cholesterol aim for below 100 hdl , or good , cholesterol : aim for above 40 ; women : aim for above 50 triglycerides aim for below 150 date : total cholesterol : ldl : hdl : triglycerides : next test : kidney function tests once a year , get a urine test to check for protein . at least once a year , get a blood test to check for creatinine . Date : urine protein : creatinine : next test : test instructions results or dates dilated eye exam see an eye doctor once a year for a complete eye exam that includes using drops in your eyes to dilate your pupils . if you are pregnant , have a complete eye exam in your first 3 months of pregnancy . have another complete eye exam 1 year after your baby is born . see your dentist twice a year for a cleaning and checkup . get pneumonia vaccine if you are younger than 64. if you 're older than 64 and your shot was more than 5 years ago , get another vaccine . get a flu shot each year . get hepatitis vaccine if you are age 19 to 59 and have not had this vaccine . consider getting this vaccine if you are 60 or older and have not had this vaccine . date of 1st dose : date of 2nd dose : date of 3rd dose : 55 daily diabetes record page week starting other blood glucose breakfast blood glucose medicine lunch blood glucose medicine dinner blood glucose medicine bedtime blood glucose medicine notes : you can also find a food and activity tracker at points to remember diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin . type 2 diabetes develops when , over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . people who are overweight and inactive are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . if you have severe hypoglycemia , youll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . when traveling , carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes in the disaster kit . keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . if you 're already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . Type 2 diabetes is a chronic metabolic condition that affects the way your body metabolizes sugar ( glucose ) , an important source of fuel for the body . in type 2 diabetes , your body either resists the effects of insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into your cells or does n't produce enough insulin to maintain normal glucose levels . what causes type 2 diabetes ? the main cause of type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . insulin resistance happens when cells in your muscles , fat and liver don ’ t respond as they should to insulin . insulin is a hormone your pancreas makes that ’ s essential for life and regulating blood sugar levels . if your body is n't responding to insulin properly , your pancreas has to make more insulin to try to overcome your increasing blood glucose levels ( hyperinsulinemia ) . if your cells become too resistant to insulin and your pancreas can ’ t make enough insulin to overcome it , it leads to type 2 diabetes . several factors can contribute to insulin resistance , including : genetics . excess body fat , especially in your belly and around your organs ( visceral fat ) . physical inactivity . eating highly processed , high-carbohydrate foods and saturated fats frequently . certain medications , like long-term corticosteroid use . hormonal disorders , like hypothyroidism and cushing syndrome . chronic stress and a lack of quality sleep . what is insulin ? insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas , a gland located behind the stomach . it plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar ( glucose ) levels . when you eat , your digestive system breaks down carbohydrates into glucose , which enters the bloodstream . in response to rising blood sugar levels , the pancreas releases insulin . the main functions of insulin include : facilitating glucose uptake : insulin enables cells in the muscles , fat , and liver to absorb glucose from the bloodstream . this allows cells to use glucose for energy . inhibiting glucose production : insulin suppresses the liver 's production of glucose . between meals , when blood sugar levels drop , the pancreas reduces insulin secretion , and the liver releases stored glucose to maintain normal blood sugar levels . promoting glycogen synthesis : insulin helps convert excess glucose into glycogen , a form of stored glucose , in the liver and muscles . this stored glycogen can be released when energy is needed . inhibiting fat breakdown : insulin also plays a role in inhibiting the breakdown of fats in fat cells . when insulin levels are high , the body tends to store excess calories as fat . in type 2 diabetes , the body may not use insulin effectively , leading to insulin resistance . this can result in the pancreas producing more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not be enough to regulate blood sugar levels , leading to elevated glucose in the bloodstream . maintaining proper insulin function is essential for overall health , and disruptions in insulin production or utilization can lead to conditions like diabetes . management of diabetes often involves strategies to regulate insulin levels , either through lifestyle modifications , medications , or insulin therapy . insulin resistance : in type 2 diabetes , the body 's cells become resistant to the action of insulin . insulin is needed to allow sugar ( glucose ) to enter cells for energy . when cells resist insulin 's signal , glucose builds up in the bloodstream , leading to high blood sugar levels . causes and risk factors : genetics : family history of diabetes can increase the risk . certain ethnic groups ( e.g . , african american , hispanic , native american ) are more prone . weight : being overweight or obese is a significant risk factor . physical inactivity : lack of exercise can contribute to insulin resistance . unhealthy diet : high consumption of processed foods , sugary beverages , and a lack of fiber . medical conditions : metabolic syndrome : a cluster of conditions ( abdominal obesity , high blood pressure , high triglycerides , low hdl cholesterol ) increases diabetes risk . polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : common in women and associated with insulin resistance . age and gender : risk increases with age , especially after 45. women with a history of gestational diabetes are at higher risk . symptoms : early symptoms : increased thirst ( polydipsia ) and hunger : experiencing excessive thirst and hunger . frequent urination : needing to urinate often , especially at night . fatigue : feeling tired and lethargic . tingling or numbness in your hands or feet dry skin . unexplained weight loss . advanced symptoms : blurred vision . slow wound healing . recurrent infections . people assigned female at birth ( afab ) may experience frequent vaginal yeast infections and/or urinary tract infections ( utis ) . if you have these symptoms , it 's important to see your healthcare provider . simple blood tests can diagnose t2 d. diagnosis : blood tests : fasting blood sugar , oral glucose tolerance test , and a1c test . symptoms and clinical signs : your doctor may consider your symptoms and overall health . management : lifestyle changes : healthy diet , regular exercise , weight management . medications : oral medications or insulin therapy may be prescribed . monitoring : regular blood sugar monitoring is important . complications : untreated or poorly managed type 2 diabetes can lead to serious complications such as heart disease , stroke , kidney damage , nerve damage , and vision problems . cardiovascular complications : increased risk of heart disease and stroke . hypertension often accompanies diabetes . microvascular complications : nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . retinopathy ( vision problems ) . foot complications : peripheral neuropathy increases the risk of foot ulcers and amputations . management : lifestyle modifications : healthy diet emphasizing whole foods , fruits , vegetables , and fiber . regular physical activity . weight management . medications : oral medications ( e.g . , metformin ) to improve insulin sensitivity . insulin therapy if oral medications are insufficient . blood sugar monitoring : regular monitoring to track blood glucose levels . education and support : diabetes education on self-care and management . emotional support for coping with the psychological aspects of diabetes . prevention : healthy lifestyle : adopting a healthy diet and regular exercise . maintaining a healthy weight . regular check-ups : regular health check-ups to monitor blood sugar levels , blood pressure , and cholesterol . public health implications : global impact : rising prevalence worldwide , associated with urbanization and lifestyle changes . healthcare costs : substantial economic burden due to healthcare costs and productivity loss . what is obesity ? obesity is a medical condition characterized by the accumulation of excessive body fat to the extent that it may have a negative impact on health . it is often defined by body mass index ( bmi ) , which is a person 's weight in kilograms divided by the square of their height in meters . a bmi of 30 or higher is generally considered indicative of obesity . 1. bmi categories : underweight : bmi less than 18.5 normal weight : bmi18.5 to 24.9 overweight : bmi25 to 29.9 obesity : bmi30 or higher 2. causes : caloric imbalance : obesity typically results from consuming more calories than the body uses , leading to the storage of excess energy as fat . genetics : genetic factors can influence an individual 's predisposition to obesity . environmental factors : factors such as unhealthy diets , sedentary lifestyles , and lack of access to nutritious foods can contribute . 3. health risks : obesity is associated with an increased risk of various health conditions , including : type 2 diabetes cardiovascular diseases ( heart disease and stroke ) certain types of cancer sleep apnea osteoarthritis respiratory problems mental health issues 4. prevention and management : adopting a healthy , balanced diet with appropriate portion sizes . engaging in regular physical activity . behavioral interventions and counseling . medical treatments and , in some cases , bariatric surgery for severe obesity . 5. global prevalence : obesity has become a global health concern , affecting people of all ages and socioeconomic backgrounds . the prevalence of obesity has risen significantly in recent decades . 6. stigma and discrimination : individuals with obesity may face societal stigma and discrimination , affecting their mental and emotional well-being . 7. childhood obesity : childhood obesity is a particular concern , as it can lead to health issues later in life . addressing obesity often requires a multifaceted approach , involving changes in diet , increased physical activity , behavioral modifications , and sometimes medical interventions . it 's essential to recognize obesity as a complex health issue with various contributing factors and to approach its prevention and management with a comprehensive and individualized strategy . what is high triglycerides ? triglycerides are a type of fat ( lipid ) found in your blood . when you eat , your body converts any calories it does n't need to use right away into triglycerides . these triglycerides are stored in fat cells for later use . while your body needs triglycerides for energy , having too high a level of triglycerides in your blood can be a risk factor for various health issues . normal triglyceride levels : normal : less than 150 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/d l ) borderline high : 150 to 199 mg/dl high : 200 to 499 mg/dl very high : 500 mg/d lor higher causes of high triglycerides : 1. unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated fats , trans fats , and refined carbohydrates can contribute to elevated triglyceride levels . 2. lack of physical activity : sedentary lifestyles and lack of regular exercise can lead to higher triglyceride levels . 3. obesity : being overweight or obese is often associated with higher triglyceride levels . 4. insulin resistance and diabetes : insulin resistance and diabetes can lead to increased triglycerides . 5. genetics : some people may have a genetic predisposition to higher triglyceride levels . 6. certain medical conditions : hypothyroidism , kidney disease , and liver disease can contribute to elevated triglycerides . 7. alcohol consumption : excessive alcohol intake can raise triglyceride levels . health risks associated with high triglycerides : 1. cardiovascular disease : high triglycerides , especially when combined with low levels of hdl cholesterol , can contribute to atherosclerosis ( hardening and narrowing of the arteries ) and increase the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2. pancreatitis : extremely high levels of triglycerides can lead to inflammation of the pancreas ( pancreatitis ) , a serious and potentially life-threatening condition . management of high triglycerides : 1. lifestyle changes : adopting a heart-healthy diet low in saturated and trans fats , and high in omega-3 fatty acids . regular physical activity . limiting alcohol intake . 2. medications : statins and other medications may be prescribed to lower triglyceride levels . 3. treatment of underlying conditions : managing underlying conditions such as diabetes or hypothyroidism . 4. regular monitoring : regular blood tests to monitor triglyceride levels . it 's important to note that managing triglyceride levels is often part of an overall strategy to maintain heart health . lifestyle modifications , including a healthy diet and regular exercise , are key components of preventing and managing high triglycerides . individuals with concerns about their triglyceride levels should consult with a healthcare professional for personalized advice and appropriate interventions . what is low hdl cholesterol ? Hdl cholesterol , or high-density lipoprotein cholesterol , is often referred to as `` good `` cholesterol . it plays a crucial role in the body by helping to remove other forms of cholesterol , specifically low-density lipoprotein ( ldl ) cholesterol ( often called `` bad `` cholesterol ) , from the bloodstream . hdl cholesterol carries cholesterol away from the arteries and back to the liver , where it can be processed and eliminated . this process helps prevent the buildup of plaque in the arteries . normal hdl cholesterol levels : desirable : 60 mg/dl and above borderline : 40 to 59 mg/dl poor : less than 40 mg/dl causes of low hdl cholesterol : 1.unhealthy lifestyle : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle can contribute to low hdl cholesterol levels . 2.unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated and trans fats can lower hdl cholesterol . 3. smoking : smoking is associated with lower hdl cholesterol levels . 4.genetics : genetic factors can influence cholesterol levels , including hdl cholesterol . 5. obesity : being overweight or obese can be associated with lower hdl cholesterol . 6.certain medical conditions : type 2 diabetes , metabolic syndrome , and some rare genetic disorders can affect hdlcholesterol levels . health implications of low hdl cholesterol : 1. increased cardiovascular risk : low hdl cholesterol is considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease . hdl cholesterol helps remove cholesterol from the arteries , and low levels may contribute to the buildup of plaque , increasing the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2.combination with high ldl cholesterol : having both low hdl cholesterol and high ldl cholesterol can significantly elevate cardiovascular risk . management of low hdl cholesterol : 1. lifestyle changes : regular physical activity , including aerobic exercise , can help raise hdl cholesterol . adopting a heart-healthy diet that includes sources of healthy fats , such as omega-3 fatty acids . 2. quit smoking : quitting smoking can have positive effects on hdl cholesterol levels . 3. weight management : losing weight , if necessary , can improve hdl cholesterol levels . 4. medications : in some cases , medications may be prescribed to raise hdl cholesterol , although lifestyle changes are usually the first approach . it 's important to note that cholesterol levels are just one aspect of cardiovascular health , and overall heart health involves a combination of factors , including blood pressure , blood sugar , and lifestyle habits . individuals concerned about their cholesterol levels should consult with a healthcare professional for a thorough evaluation and personalized advice on managing their cardiovascular risk . what is hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) ? hyperglycemia happens when there ’ s too much sugar ( glucose ) in your blood . It 's also called high blood sugar or high blood glucose . this happens when your body has too little insulin ( a hormone ) or if your body ca n't use insulin properly ( insulin resistance ) . hyperglycemia usually means you have diabetes , and people with diabetes can experience hyperglycemia episodes frequently . if you have hyperglycemia that 's untreated for long periods of time , it can damage your nerves , blood vessels , tissues and organs . evere hyperglycemia can also lead to an acute ( sudden and severe ) life-threatening complication called diabetes-related ketoacidosis ( dka ) , especially in people with diabetes who take insulin or people with undiagnosed type 1 diabetes . this requires immediate medical treatment . what is blood sugar ? glucose ( sugar ) mainly comes from carbohydrates in the food and drinks you consume . it 's your body 's main source of energy . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . if you do n't have diabetes , several bodily processes naturally help keep your blood glucose in a healthy range . insulin , a hormone your pancreas makes , is the most significant contributor to maintaining healthy blood sugar . high blood sugar most often happens due to a lack of insulin or insulin resistance . this leads to diabetes . people who have diabetes must use medication , like oral diabetes medications or synthetic insulin , and/or lifestyle changes to help keep their blood sugar levels in range . current diabetes statistics in the philippines according to the international diabetes federation or idf , the prevalence rate of diabetes in filipino adults is approximately 6.3 % . that means that out of 63 million adults in our country , almost 4 million have diabetes . but , even with these high figures , there could be more undocumented diabetes cases in the philippines . after all , the idf didn ’ t include younger people in their data , and they didn ’ t take pre-diabetes into consideration . what ’ s even more alarming is that in a 2016 report , the world health organization announced that 6 % of all deaths in the philippines occurred due to diabetes . is type 2 diabetes genetic ? the cause of t2 dis complex , but researchers know that genetics play a strong role . your lifetime risk of developing t2 dis 40 % if you have one biological parent with t2d and 70 % if both of your biological parents have it . researchers have identified at least 150 dna variations linked to the risk of developing t2d some increase your risk and others decrease it . some of these variations may directly play a role in insulin resistance and insulin production . others may increase your risk of t2d by increasing your tendency to have overweight or obesity . these genetic variations likely act together with health and lifestyle factors to influence your overall risk of t2 d. what are the risk factors for type 2 diabetes ? you ’ re more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you : have a family history of type 2 diabetes ( biological parent or sibling ) . are older than 45. have overweight or obesity ( a bmi greater than 25 ) . are physically active less than three times a week . are black , hispanic , native american , asian american or pacific islander . had gestational diabetes while pregnant . have high blood pressure and/or high cholesterol . have prediabetes . have polycystic ovarian syndrome ( pcos ) . as t2d symptoms typically come on slowly , it ’ s important to see your primary care provider regularly if you 're at risk for the condition . this way , they can do screenings , like a basic metabolic panel ( bmp ) , to check on your blood sugar levels . it ’ s better to catch t2d earlier rather than later . diagnosis and tests how is type 2 diabetes diagnosed ? the following blood tests help your healthcare provider diagnose type 2 diabetes : fasting plasma glucose test : this lab test checks your blood sugar level . you typically need to get this test in the morning after an eight-hour fast ( nothing to eat or drink except water ) . a result of 126 mg/d lor higher means you have diabetes . random plasma glucose test : this lab test also checks your blood sugar , but you can get it at any time without fasting . a result of 200 mg/dl or higher means you have diabetes . a1c test : this lab test measures your average blood sugar levels over the past two to three months . a result of 6.5 % or higher means you have diabetes . in some cases , your provider may order an autoantibody blood test to see if you have type 1 diabetes instead of t2 d. management and treatment what is the treatment for type 2 diabetes ? unlike many health conditions , you mainly manage t2d on your own with medical guidance and support from your healthcare team . this could include your : primary care physician ( pcp ) or endocrinologist . registered dietitian . certified diabetes care and education specialist ( cdces ) . ophthalmologist ( eye doctor ) . dentist . your team should also include family members and other important people in your life . managing t2d can be challenging you have to make several decisions every day for it . but everything you do to improve your health is worth it . the core features of type 2 diabetes management include : lifestyle changes , like more exercise and eating adjustments . blood sugar monitoring . medication . exercise for type 2 diabetes regular activity is important for everyone . it 's even more important if you have diabetes . exercise is good for your health because it : lowers your blood sugar level without medication in the short term and long term . burns calories and may help with weight loss . improves blood flow and blood pressure . increases your energy level and boosts your mood . helps with stress management . talk to your provider before starting any exercise program . you may need to take special steps before , during and after physical activity , especially if you take insulin . the general goal is to get at least 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity physical activity . type 2 diabetes diet ask your healthcare provider or registered dietitian to recommend a meal plan that ’ s right for you . what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat are all important in keeping your blood sugar levels in the range that your healthcare team recommends . the key to eating with type 2 diabetes is to eat a variety of nutritious foods from all food groups , in the amounts your meal plan outlines . in general , these types of foods can help support healthy blood sugar levels : lean proteins , like chicken , eggs , fish and turkey . non-starchy vegetables , like broccoli , green beans , salad greens and cucumbers . healthy fats , like avocados , nuts , natural peanut butter and olive oil . complex carbohydrates , like beans , berries , sweet potatoes and whole-wheat bread . blood sugar monitoring monitoring your blood sugar is essential to finding out how well your current treatment plan is working . it gives you information on how to manage diabetes on a daily and sometimes even hourly basis . the results of blood sugar monitoring can help you make decisions about food , physical activity and dosing insulin . several things can affect your blood sugar . you can learn to predict some of these impacts with time and practice , while others are very difficult or impossible to predict . that ’ s why its important to check your blood sugar regularly if your healthcare provider recommends doing so . there are two main ways you can monitor your blood sugar at home if you have diabetes : with a glucose meter and finger stick . with a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) . you may choose either or both methods for a variety of reasons , such as : your access to the technology , which can vary due to cost and medical insurance coverage . how often your healthcare provider recommends checking your blood sugar . the medications you ’ re taking . your overall health . type 2 diabetes medications your healthcare provider may recommend taking medication , in addition to lifestyle changes , to manage type 2 diabetes . these include : oral diabetes medications : these are medications that you take by mouth to help manage blood sugar levels in people who have t2d but still produce some insulin . there are several types . the most commonly prescribed one is metformin . your provider may prescribe more than one oral diabetes medication at a time to achieve the best blood glucose management . glp-1 and dual glp-1/gipagonists : these are injectable medications that mainly help manage blood sugar levels in people with t2d . some glp-1 agonists can also help treat obesity . insulin : synthetic insulin directly lowers blood sugar levels . there are several types of insulin , like long-acting and short-acting types . you may inject it with syringes or pens , use inhaled insulin , or use an insulin pump . other medications : you may take other medications to manage coexisting conditions , like high blood pressure and high cholesterol . can type 2 diabetes be reversed ? type 2 diabetes is a chronic ( long-term ) disease , which means you must manage it for the rest of your life . there ’ s no cure for t2d . but you can manage it with lifestyle changes , medication and blood sugar monitoring in a way that keeps your blood sugar levels in a healthy range . if you stop managing it or undermanage it , your blood sugar levels will go back up . prevention can prevent type 2 diabetes ? certain strategies can help lower your risk of developing type 2 diabetes or delay its onset , including : exercising regularly ( at least 150 minutes a week ) . maintaining a weight that 's healthy for you . eating nutritious food . not smoking . unfortunately , some people have such strong genetic risk factors that even lifestyle changes are n't enough to prevent developing t2d . outlook / prognosis what is the outlook for type 2 diabetes ? if you have type 2 diabetes , your outlook depends on several factors , like : your age at diagnosis . how often and how well you ’ re able to keep your blood sugar levels in range . if you have other conditions , like high blood pressure or high cholesterol . your access to healthcare , diabetes management tools and medication , nutritious foods and support from loved ones . untreated or undermanaged t2d can lead to a range of health conditions . what are the complications of type 2 diabetes ? as your blood touches virtually every part of your body , having undermanaged type 2 diabetes that results in continuous high blood sugar over a long period of time can damage several areas of your body . potential complications of type 2 diabetes include : cardiovascular disease , including : coronary artery disease ( cad ) . peripheral artery disease ( pad ) . cerebrovascular disease . heart attack . stroke . eye conditions , including : diabetes-related retinopathy . diabetes-related macular edema . cataracts . glaucoma . blindness . additional complications include : diabetes-related nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . diabetes-related neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . skin conditions , like dry skin and bacterial and fungal infections . foot problems , including ulcers and infections that can lead to gangrene and possible amputation . gum disease and other oral health problems . hearing loss . digestive problems , including gastroparesis . sexual dysfunction . short-term complications of t2d hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state ( hhs ) is a life-threatening complication of type 2 diabetes . hhs happens when your blood sugar levels are too high for a long period , leading to severe dehydration and confusion . symptoms of hhs usually come on slowly and can take days or weeks to develop . symptoms include : very high blood sugar level ( over 600 mg/d l ) . mental changes , such as confusion , delirium or experiencing hallucinations . loss of consciousness . dry mouth and extreme thirst . frequent urination . blurred vision or loss of vision . weakness or paralysis that may be worse on one side of your body . hhs is life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment . if you experience these symptoms , call 911 or your local emergency services number . living with how do itake care of myself if i have type 2 diabetes ? type 2 diabetes is a complex condition that requires daily management , effort and planning . some tips that can help you manage t2d include : try to stick to healthy lifestyle changes : regular exercise and healthy eating plans are core parts of t2d management . set small goals and make one change at a time to prevent becoming overwhelmed . check your blood sugar regularly checking your blood sugar with a fingerstick and meter and/or using a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) is crucial to managing diabetes and preventing complications . follow your providers guidance for how often you should be checking it . take your medication regularly : follow your healthcare providers instructions for taking your medications ( if applicable ) . see your diabetes provider regularly : its important to see the provider who helps you manage t2d regularly to be sure that your management plan is working . don ’ t be afraid to ask them specific questions . see your other providers regularly , especially your eye doctor : type 2 diabetes can cause complications in various areas of your body , but especially your eyes . it ’ s important to see your eye doctor ( ophthalmologist ) at least yearly so that they can check the health of your eyes . have a sick day plan : talk with your diabetes provider about how to take care of yourself and manage t2d when you ’ re sick . illness can make it more difficult to manage blood sugar levels and can trigger hhs . stay educated : don ’ t be afraid to ask your provider questions about t2 d. the more you know about t2d and your management , the more likely you 'll be able to live healthily and prevent complications . find community : connecting with other people who have t2d whether in-person or online can help you feel less alone . take care of your mental health : people with diabetes are two to three times more likely to have depression and are 20 % more likely to be diagnosed with anxiety than those without diabetes . living with a chronic condition that requires constant care can be overwhelming . it 's important to talk to a mental health professional if you 're experiencing signs of depression and/or anxiety . when should i see my healthcare provider if i have type 2 diabetes ? you ’ ll need to have regular appointments with your healthcare team to be sure you 're on track with your t2d management plan . as your body , life and routines change , your management will need to , as well . your healthcare team can provide new strategies that are unique to your needs . if you develop symptoms of any diabetes complications , be sure to see your provider as soon as possible . a note from cleveland clinic type 2 diabetes involves constant day-to-day care and management . while it 'll likely be very overwhelming at first , over time you 'll get a better grasp on how to manage the condition and how to be in tune with your body.be sure to see your healthcare team regularly . managing type 2 diabetes involves a team effort you ’ ll want both medical professionals and friends and family on your side . don ’ t hesitate to reach out to them if you need help . type 2 diabetes is a condition that happens because of a problem in the way the body regulates and uses sugar as a fuel . that sugar also is called glucose . this long-term condition results in too much sugar circulating in the blood . eventually , high blood sugar levels can lead to disorders of the circulatory , nervous and immune systems . in type 2 diabetes , there are primarily two problems . the pancreas does not produce enough insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into the cells . and cells respond poorly to insulin and take in less sugar . type 2 diabetes used to be known as adult-onset diabetes , but both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can begin during childhood and adulthood . type 2 is more common in older adults . but the increase in the number of children with obesity has led to more cases of type 2 diabetes in younger people . there 's no cure for type 2 diabetes . losing weight , eating well and exercising can help manage the disease . if diet and exercise are n't enough to control blood sugar , diabetes medications or insulin therapy may be recommended . symptoms symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly . in fact , you can be living with type 2 diabetes for years and not know it . when symptoms are present , they may include : - increased thirst : experiencing a persistent feeling of thirst , often accompanied by a need to drink larger amounts of water than usual . - frequent urination : having to urinate more often than usual , which may include waking up frequently during the night to urinate . - increased hunger : feeling hungry more frequently or having an increased appetite , sometimes even after eating . - unintended weight loss : losing weight without actively trying to do so , which may be a result of the body not properly utilizing glucose for energy . - fatigue : persistent feelings of tiredness and lack of energy , even with adequate rest . - blurred vision : experiencing blurry or distorted vision , which can be a result of changes in the fluid levels within the eyes due to high blood sugar . - slow-healing sores : wounds and sores taking longer to heal than usual , which is linked to reduced circulation and compromised immune function . - slow healing of wounds : similar to slow-healing sores , individuals with diabetes may experience delays in the healing of cuts , bruises , or other injuries . - frequent infections : increased susceptibility to infections , such as urinary tract infections , skin infections , and others , due to compromised immune function . - numbness or tingling in the hands or feet : peripheral neuropathy , a condition where nerve damage can lead to sensations of numbness , tingling , or pain in the extremities . - areas of darkened skin , usually in the armpits and neck : acanthosis nigricans , a condition characterized by dark , thickened , and velvety skin in certain areas , often associated with insulin resistance . risk factors - insulin resistance : the primary factor in type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . the body 's cells become resistant to the effects of insulin , a hormone that helps regulate blood sugar . as a result , the pancreas produces more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not keep up with the increased demand . - genetics : there is a genetic predisposition to type 2 diabetes , and having a family history of the condition increases the risk . - lifestyle factors : 1. obesity : excess body weight , especially around the abdomen , is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 2. physical inactivity : lack of regular physical activity is associated with an increased risk . 3. unhealthy diet : diets high in refined sugars , saturated fats , and processed foods can contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . - age and ethnicity : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases with age , and certain ethnic groups , such as african americans , hispanics , native americans , and asian americans , are more prone to the condition . - obesity : obesity is a medical condition characterized by an excessive accumulation of body fat . it is often measured using the body mass index ( bmi ) , with obesity defined as a bmi of 30 or higher . obesity is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes , as excess body fat can lead to insulin resistance . - sedentary lifestyle : a sedentary lifestyle refers to a pattern of living that involves little or no physical activity or exercise . lack of regular physical activity is associated with various health risks , including an increased risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes . sedentary behavior may involve extended periods of sitting or low levels of physical movement . - family history : family history refers to the presence of a particular health condition , such as diabetes , among close biological relatives ( parents , siblings ) . having a family history of diabetes can increase an individual 's risk of developing the condition , suggesting a genetic predisposition . - age : age is a non-modifiable risk factor for type 2 diabetes . the risk of developing diabetes increases with age , particularly after the age of 45. this may be attributed to factors such as changes in metabolism , hormonal changes , and cumulative exposure to other risk factors over time . - ethnicity : ethnicity refers to the cultural and ancestral background of an individual . certain ethnic groups have a higher predisposition to type 2 diabetes . for example , african americans , hispanics , native americans , asian americans , and pacific islanders are at an increased risk compared to the general population . genetic factors and lifestyle patterns within specific ethnic communities contribute to these disparities . causes - genes : scientists have found different bits of dna that affect how your body makes insulin . - weight : having extra weight or obesity can cause insulin resistance . metabolic syndrome . people with insulin resistance often have a group of conditions including high blood sugar , high blood pressure , and high cholesterol and triglycerides . - too much glucose from your liver : when your blood sugar is low , your liver makes and sends out glucose . after you eat , your blood sugar goes up , and your liver usually slows down and stores its glucose for later . but some people 's livers do n't . they keep making sugar . - bad communication between cells : sometimes , cells send the wrong signals or do n't pick up messages correctly . when these problems affect how your cells make and use insulin or glucose , this can lead to diabetes . - broken beta cells : if the cells that make insulin send it out at the wrong time , your blood sugar gets thrown off . high blood sugar can damage these cells , too . medical history and health : - insulin resistance : insulin resistance is a condition where the body 's cells do not respond effectively to insulin , a hormone that regulates blood sugar . it can lead to elevated blood glucose levels and is a precursor to type 2 diabetes . - prediabetes : prediabetes is a condition where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be classified as diabetes . individuals with prediabetes have an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes . - heart and blood vessel disease : heart and blood vessel diseases encompass a range of conditions affecting the cardiovascular system , including coronary artery disease , heart failure , and stroke . diabetes is a significant risk factor for these diseases . - high blood pressure : high blood pressure ( hypertension ) is a condition where the force of blood against the artery walls is consistently too high . it is a common risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , and individuals with diabetes are at an increased risk . - low hdl ( `` good `` ) cholesterol : hdl cholesterol is often referred to as `` good `` cholesterol as it helps remove other forms of cholesterol from the bloodstream . low levels of hdl cholesterol are associated with an increased risk of heart disease . - high triglycerides : triglycerides are a type of fat found in the blood . high levels of triglycerides are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease , and they often accompany conditions like obesity and insulin resistance . - being overweight or having obesity : being overweight or having obesity is a condition where excess body fat accumulates , increasing the risk of developing type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and other health problems . - having a baby who weighed more than 9 pounds : giving birth to a baby weighing more than 9 pounds may be a risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes later in life . - gestational diabetes : gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy . women who have had gestational diabetes are at an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life . - polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : pcos is a hormonal disorder common among women of reproductive age . it is associated with insulin resistance and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . - depression : depression is a mental health condition characterized by persistent feelings of sadness , loss of interest or pleasure , and other emotional and physical symptoms . it may be linked to an increased risk of developing diabetes . lifestyle factors : - getting little or no exercise : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle are significant risk factors for type 2 diabetes . regular exercise helps improve insulin sensitivity and manage weight . - smoking : smoking is a well-established risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , including heart disease . individuals who smoke and have diabetes face an increased risk of complications . - stress : chronic stress can contribute to unhealthy lifestyle habits , such as overeating or not getting enough exercise , which may increase the risk of developing diabetes . - sleeping too little or too much : disruptions in sleep patterns , whether due to insufficient sleep or excessive sleep , can affect metabolism and insulin sensitivity , potentially contributing to diabetes risk . type 2 diabetes diagnosis and tests diagnosing type 2 diabetes typically involves a combination of clinical evaluation and laboratory tests . here are the common methods and tests used for the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes : 1. symptoms and clinical evaluation : - symptoms : the presence of classic symptoms such as increased thirst , frequent urination , unexplained weight loss , fatigue , and others may prompt further investigation . - medical history : the healthcare provider will review the patient 's medical history , including family history of diabetes and other relevant factors . 2. fasting blood sugar test : - this test measures the blood glucose level after an overnight fast ( usually at least 8 hours without eating or drinking anything except water ) . - diagnostic criteria : a fasting blood sugar level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/d l ) or higher on two separate occasions generally indicates diabetes . 3. oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : -the ogttinvolves fasting overnight and then drinking a sugary solution . blood sugar levels are measured at intervals after consuming the solution . -diagnostic criteria : a blood sugar level of 200 mg/d lor higher two hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . 4. hemoglobin a1c test : - this test measures the average blood glucose level over the past two to three months by assessing the percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) . - diagnostic criteria : an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . 5. random blood sugar test : - this test measures blood glucose levels at any time of the day , regardless of when the individual last ate . - diagnostic criteria : a random blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher , along with diabetes symptoms , may indicate diabetes . 6. clinical guidelines and criteria : - world health organization ( who ) : the who also offers criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes , including fasting glucose levels and oral glucose tolerance tests . 7. blood tests : - a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) test : purpose : measures the average percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) over the past 2 or 3 months . procedure : a blood sample is taken , and the result is expressed as a percentage . an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . -fasting plasma glucose test : purpose : measures blood sugar levels after an overnight fast . procedure : the individual refrains from eating or drinking ( except water ) for at least 8 hours before the test . A blood sample is taken , and a fasting glucose level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) or higher on two separate occasions may indicate diabetes . - oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : purpose : checks blood glucose levels before and 2 hours after consuming a sweetened beverage to evaluate how the body handles sugar . procedure : the individual drinks a sugary solution , and blood samples are taken before and after . a blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher 2 hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . it 's important to note that the diagnostic criteria and methods may vary slightly between different organizations and regions . additionally , the diagnosis is not solely based on a single test result ; healthcare providers consider multiple factors , including the patient 's overall health , risk factors , and symptoms . individuals at risk for type 2 diabetes , such as those with a family history or certain lifestyle factors , may undergo regular screenings to detect the condition early . early detection and management are crucial for preventing complications associated with diabetes . a healthcare professional will determine the most appropriate diagnostic approach based on the individual 's circumstances . stages of type 2 diabetes 1. insulin resistance : description : in this initial stage , the body usually produces enough insulin to regulate blood sugar levels within the normal range . however , cells resist the effects of insulin , meaning they do n't use it efficiently . as a result , the body compensates by producing more insulin to aid glucose entry into the cells . characteristics : insulin resistance may be temporary , but it can persist over time . there is n't a specific test to directly measure insulin resistance , making it challenging to diagnose this stage directly . 2. prediabetes : description : insulin resistance , if not addressed , leads to an accumulation of glucose in the blood . prediabetes is the stage where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not elevated enough to be classified as diabetes . during this stage , individuals may not experience noticeable symptoms . diagnostic criteria : an a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) level between 5.7 % and 6.4 % is indicative of prediabetes . this blood test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months . implications of prediabetes : - individuals with prediabetes are at an increased risk for developing heart disease , stroke , and type 2 diabetes . - early intervention through lifestyle modifications , such as a healthy diet and regular physical activity , can help prevent the progression to type 2 diabetes . it 's important to note that these stages represent a continuum , and the progression to type 2 diabetes is not inevitable . lifestyle changes , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , can play a crucial role in preventing or delaying the onset of type 2 diabetes in individuals with insulin resistance or prediabetes . regular health check-ups and screenings are important for early detection and intervention . type 2 diabetes treatment the treatment of type 2 diabetes involves a comprehensive approach that includes lifestyle changes and , in some cases , medication . here are the key components of type 2 diabetes treatment : 1. lifestyle changes : - weight loss : objective : achieving and maintaining a healthy weight . benefits : weight loss can improve insulin sensitivity and help regulate blood sugar levels . recommendation : losing at least 7 % of body weight is considered beneficial . - healthy eating : objective : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet . guidance : work with a registered dietitian to learn about carbohydrates , create a meal plan , and focus on : eating fewer calories . reducing consumption of refined carbs , especially sweets . incorporating more vegetables and fruits into the diet . increasing fiber intake . - regular exercise : objective : engaging in regular physical activity . recommendation : aim for 30 to 60 minutes of exercise every day , which can include activities such as walking , biking , swimming , or other forms of aerobic exercise . strength training , like yoga or weightlifting , is also beneficial . note : check with your healthcare provider before starting a new exercise program , especially if you have other health concerns . - monitoring blood sugar levels : objective : regularly checking blood sugar levels to track the effectiveness of treatment . guidance : depending on your treatment plan , especially if you are on insulin , your doctor will provide instructions on how often to monitor blood sugar levels . - medication : purpose : medications may be prescribed to help manage blood sugar levels . - types of medications : - oral medications : these include various classes of drugs that help improve insulin sensitivity , reduce glucose production by the liver , and enhance glucose uptake by cells . - injectable medications : some people may require insulin injections or other injectable medications to control blood sugar . - regular medical check-ups : importance : regular visits to your healthcare provider are crucial to monitor overall health , adjust treatment plans as needed , and address any emerging issues . diabetes education : purpose : empower individuals with the knowledge and skills to manage their diabetes effectively . resources : diabetes education programs and support from healthcare professionals , including registered dietitians and diabetes educators . medication if lifestyle changes don ’ t get you to your target blood sugar levels , you may need medication . some of the most common for type 2 diabetes include : 1. metformin ( fortamet , glucophage , glumetza , riomet ) . this is usually the first medication used to treat type 2 diabetes . it lowers the amount of glucose your liver makes and helps your body respond better to the insulin it does make . 2. sulfonylureas . this group of drugs helps your body make more insulin . they include glimepiride ( amaryl ) , glipizide ( glucotrol ) , and glyburide ( dia beta , micronase ) . 3. meglitinides . they help your body make more insulin , and they work faster than sulfonylureas . you might take nateglinide ( starlix ) or repaglinide ( prandin ) . 4. thiazolidinediones . like metformin , they make you more sensitive to insulin . you could get pioglitazone ( actos ) or rosiglitazone ( avandia ) . but they also raise your risk of heart problems , so they are n't usually a first choice for treatment . 5. dpp-4 inhibitors . these medications -- linagliptin ( tradjenta ) , saxagliptin ( onglyza ) , and sitagliptin ( januvia ) -- help lower your blood sugar levels , but they can also cause joint pain and could inflame your pancreas . they work by blocking dpp-4 , which is an enzyme that affects the hormone incretin . 6. glp-1 receptor agonists . you take these medications with a needle to slow digestion and lower blood sugar levels . some of the most common ones are exenatide ( byetta , bydureon ) , liraglutide ( victoza ) , and semaglutide ( ozempic ) . 7. sglt2 inhibitors . these help your kidneys filter out more glucose . you might get bexagliflozin ( brenzavvy ) , canagliflozin ( invokana ) , dapagliflozin ( farxiga ) , or empagliflozin ( jardiance ) . empagliflozin has also proven effective in reducing the risk of hospitalization or death from heart failure . 8. gipand glp-1 receptor agonist . tirzepatide ( mounjaro ) is the first in its class and activates both the glp-1 and gipreceptors , which leads to improved blood sugar control . 9. insulin . you might take long-lasting shots at night , such as insulin detemir ( levemir ) or insulin glargine ( lantus ) . complications 1. cardiovascular diseases : description : high blood sugar levels over time can lead to damage in the heart and blood vessels , increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases . specific risks : increased likelihood of heart disease or stroke . higher risk of blocked blood vessels ( atherosclerosis ) . elevated risk of chest pain ( angina ) . 2. nerve damage ( neuropathy ) : description : prolonged exposure to high blood sugar can cause damage to the nerves throughout the body . specific risks : digestive issues . impaired feeling in the feet . sexual response problems . 3. kidney disease : description : diabetes is a leading cause of kidney disease and can lead to kidney failure . specific risks : kidney damage requiring dialysis or transplantation . 4. eye problems ( retinopathy ) : description : high blood sugar can damage the tiny blood vessels in the eyes , leading to vision problems . specific risks : retinopathy , which can cause blindness if untreated . 5. foot problems and amputation risk : description : poor circulation and nerve damage can contribute to foot problems , increasing the risk of infections and , in severe cases , amputation . specific risks : slower wound healing . increased risk of infections . 6. other complications : pregnancy : increased risk of miscarriage , stillbirth , or birth defects in infants born to parents with diabetes . sleep apnea : individuals with diabetes may be more prone to developing sleep apnea , a condition characterized by interrupted breathing during sleep . hearing problems : higher likelihood of hearing problems , though the exact relationship is not clear . brain health : high blood sugar levels may contribute to brain damage and an increased risk of conditions such as alzheimer 's disease . depression : people with diabetes are twice as likely to experience depression compared to those without the condition . type 2 diabetes diet guidelines : 1. work with a dietitian : collaborate with a registered dietitian to create a personalized meal plan based on your specific needs , preferences , and health goals . 2. focus on whole foods : limit highly processed foods : reduce the consumption of highly processed foods , which often contain added sugars , unhealthy fats , and high levels of sodium . choose whole , unprocessed foods whenever possible . control carbohydrates : 3. reduce added sugars : minimize the intake of foods and beverages with added sugars , such as sugary drinks , candies , and desserts . choose complex carbohydrates : opt for whole grains , legumes , and high-fiber foods to help regulate blood sugar levels . replace low-fiber refined grains ( e.g . , white bread ) with whole grains ( e.g . , whole wheat bread , brown rice ) . 4. prioritize non-starchy vegetables : include in every meal : boost your intake of non-starchy vegetables like broccoli , leafy greens , peppers , and green beans . these vegetables are rich in fiber , vitamins , and minerals . 5. moderate portion sizes : portion control : be mindful of portion sizes to manage calorie intake and prevent overeating . use smaller plates to help control portions . 6. lean protein sources : choose lean proteins : include lean protein sources such as poultry , fish , tofu , legumes , and low-fat dairy in your diet . limit red and processed meats . 7. healthy fats : opt for healthy fats : choose sources of healthy fats , such as avocados , nuts , seeds , and olive oil . limit saturated and trans fats found in fried foods and processed snacks . 8. regular meal timing : establish consistent meal times : aim for regular meal timings to help regulate blood sugar levels . include snacks if needed , especially if taking medications that may cause low blood sugar . 9. stay hydrated : drink water : stay hydrated by drinking water throughout the day . limit sugary beverages and alcohol . 10. monitor blood sugar responses : test and analyze : regularly monitor blood sugar levels to understand how different foods impact your readings . adjust your diet based on your blood sugar responses . 11. individualized approach : personalize your plan : recognize that individual responses to foods can vary . tailor your diet to your specific needs and preferences . 12. regular review and adjustments : stay in touch with healthcare providers : regularly review your diet plan with healthcare providers and make adjustments as needed . managing type 2 diabetes managing your type 2 diabetes well helps you avoid complications and feel your best . along with a healthy diet , regular exercise , and medication as prescribed : 1. keep your blood pressure and cholesterol levels in the healthy range . high levels of either could raise your risk of diabetes complications . 2. get regular eye exams , dentist visits , and physicals . 3. check your feet daily for sores , redness , or swelling and let your doctor know if you notice any issues . 4. get at least 7 hours of good-quality sleep each night , as sleep loss interferes with blood sugar control . ask your doctor for help if you have a hard time sleeping . 5. be careful with alcohol . limit alcoholic drinks to 1-2 drinks a day , depending on your size and gender . if you do drink alcohol , check your blood sugar afterward . 6. work with your doctor to come up with a sick day plan . even a minor illness can interfere with your blood sugar and insulin levels . you may need to adjust your medications or check your blood sugar more often . type 2 diabetes prevention strategies : 1. weight management : - aim to lose 7 % to 10 % of your body weight if overweight . - weight loss in this range can significantly reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes . 2. regular physical activity : - engage in at least 30 minutes of brisk walking or moderate-intensity exercise most days of the week . - physical activity helps improve insulin sensitivity and overall metabolic health . 3. healthy eating habits : - avoid highly processed carbohydrates . - limit the consumption of sugary drinks . - reduce intake of trans and saturated fats . - limit red and processed meat consumption . - emphasize a balanced diet rich in fruits , vegetables , whole grains , lean proteins , and healthy fats . 4. smoking cessation : - quit smoking to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes . - work with your doctor to manage weight gain that may occur after quitting . 5. regular monitoring of health : - keep track of key health indicators , including blood pressure , cholesterol levels , and body weight . - regular health check-ups and screenings can help detect and address risk factors early . 6. healthy diet : - adopt a well-balanced and nutritious diet that supports overall health . - work with a dietitian if needed to create a personalized meal plan . 7. regular exercise routine : - establish and maintain a regular exercise routine that includes both aerobic and strength-training exercises . - exercise is a powerful tool in preventing and managing diabetes . 8. weight management : - strive to maintain a healthy weight through a combination of a balanced diet and regular physical activity . - weight management is crucial for overall health and diabetes prevention . 9. monitoring blood sugar levels : - regularly monitor blood sugar levels , especially if you have risk factors for diabetes . - early detection and intervention are key in preventing the progression to type 2 diabetes . 10. medications ( if prescribed ) : - if prescribed by a healthcare provider , take medications as directed . - medications may be recommended for individuals at high risk of developing diabetes . preventing type 2 diabetes involves making consistent and sustainable lifestyle changes . these measures not only reduce the risk of diabetes but also contribute to overall well-being and long-term health . individuals with specific risk factors or a family history of diabetes should work closely with healthcare providers to develop a personalized prevention plan . monitoring : - blood glucose levels : regular monitoring of blood glucose levels is essential to track how different factors , such as diet and exercise , affect blood sugar . - a1c levels : the a1c test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months , offering insight into long-term glucose control . - blood pressure : monitoring blood pressure is crucial , as individuals with diabetes have an increased risk of cardiovascular complications . - cholesterol levels : keeping cholesterol levels in check is important for cardiovascular health , especially given the higher risk in diabetes . treatment options : - oral medications : various classes of oral medications help manage blood sugar levels by improving insulin sensitivity , reducing glucose production , or aiding glucose uptake . - insulin therapy : some individuals may require insulin injections to regulate blood sugar effectively . lifestyle modifications : healthy habits , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , are foundational to diabetes management . - bariatric surgery : in specific cases , bariatric surgery may be considered as a treatment option . nutrition : - carbohydrate counting : monitoring and managing carbohydrate intake is crucial for blood sugar control . - glycemic index : understanding the glycemic index of foods helps individuals make informed choices to prevent rapid spikes in blood sugar . - balanced meals : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet supports overall health and diabetes management . - portion control : managing portion sizes helps regulate calorie intake and maintain stable blood sugar levels . education and support : - diabetes education programs : these programs provide information and skills to individuals with diabetes for effective self-management . - support groups : connecting with others facing similar challenges can provide emotional support and practical insights . - lifestyle counseling : professional counseling helps individuals address behavioral aspects , set goals , and make sustainable lifestyle changes . medical professionals : 1. endocrinologist : specialization : endocrinologists are medical doctors who specialize in endocrinology , a field that focuses on the endocrine system and hormone-related disorders . diabetes falls under their expertise , as it involves the regulation of insulin , a key hormone . role in diabetes management : - diagnosis : endocrinologists often play a crucial role in diagnosing diabetes , especially when the condition is complex or difficult to manage . - treatment planning : they create comprehensive treatment plans tailored to the individual , considering factors like medication , insulin therapy , and lifestyle modifications . - management of complications : endocrinologists are equipped to address and manage complications associated with diabetes , such as cardiovascular issues , kidney problems , and nerve damage . 2. diabetes educator : specialization : diabetes educators are healthcare professionals with specialized training in diabetes care and education . they may include nurses , dietitians , pharmacists , or other healthcare providers . role in diabetes management : education : diabetes educators empower individuals with diabetes through education , covering topics such as blood sugar monitoring , medication management , and lifestyle modifications . support : they provide ongoing support , helping individuals navigate the challenges of daily diabetes management and offering practical solutions . behavioral counseling : diabetes educators often engage in behavioral counseling to assist individuals in adopting and sustaining healthy habits . 3. dietitian/nutritionist : specialization : dietitians or nutritionists are experts in food and nutrition , with specialized training in providing dietary guidance for various health conditions , including diabetes . role in diabetes management : - meal planning : dietitians help create personalized meal plans that align with diabetes management goals , considering factors like carbohydrate counting , glycemic index , and portion control . - nutritional counseling : they offer nutritional counseling to address individual dietary preferences , cultural considerations , and lifestyle factors . - weight management : dietitians play a crucial role in weight management , a key component of diabetes care . 4. primary care physician : - specialization : primary care physicians ( pcps ) are general practitioners who provide comprehensive healthcare and serve as the first point of contact for individuals seeking medical care . role in diabetes management : - initial diagnosis : pcps often diagnose type 2 diabetes during routine check-ups or in response to specific symptoms . - ongoing monitoring : they play a central role in the ongoing monitoring of diabetes and related health issues through regular check-ups . - coordination of care : pcps coordinate with specialists , such as endocrinologists and diabetes educators , to ensure a comprehensive and integrated approach to diabetes management . - medication management : pcps may prescribe and manage medications for diabetes , adjusting treatment plans as needed . blood glucose monitoring devices : 1. glucometer : description : a glucometer , also known as a blood glucose meter or blood sugar meter , is a portable , handheld device designed for self-monitoring of blood glucose levels . how it works : - individuals with diabetes use a lancet to prick their fingertip and obtain a small drop of blood . - this blood sample is then applied to a test strip inserted into the glucometer . - the glucometer analyzes the blood sample and provides a digital readout of the current blood glucose level . key features : - portability : glucometers are compact and easy to carry , allowing individuals to monitor their blood glucose levels conveniently at home or on the go . - rapid results : the results are typically available within seconds , enabling quick and timely adjustments to medication , diet , or activity . usage : - individuals often use glucometers multiple times a day to track variations in blood glucose levels . - regular monitoring helps in understanding how food , physical activity , and medications impact blood sugar . advantages : - cost-effective and widely accessible . - easy to use for routine monitoring . limitations : - provides a snapshot of blood glucose at a specific moment . - does not capture trends or variations between measurements . 2. continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) : description : continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) systems are advanced devices that offer real-time monitoring of glucose levels throughout the day and night . how it works : - a small sensor is inserted under the skin , usually on the abdomen . - the sensor continuously measures glucose levels in the interstitial fluid ( fluid between cells ) and transmits this data to a monitor or a smartphone . - the monitor displays real-time glucose levels and trends . key features : - continuous monitoring : cgm systems provide a continuous stream of data , offering a more comprehensive view of glucose fluctuations . - alerts and alarms : users can set customizable alerts for high and low glucose levels , enhancing proactive management . - trend analysis : cgm devices provide graphs and trend lines , helping individuals understand how their glucose levels change over time . usage : - cgm systems are typically worn for several days , up to two weeks , before requiring sensor replacement . - data can be downloaded and shared with healthcare providers for comprehensive analysis . advantages : - offers a more detailed and continuous picture of glucose dynamics . - provides insights into how lifestyle factors impact glucose trends . limitations : - higher cost compared to traditional glucometers . - requires sensor insertion beneath the skin , which may be uncomfortable for some individuals . genetic factors type 2 diabetes has a complex etiology , and both genetic and environmental factors contribute to its development . genetic factors play a significant role in determining an individual 's susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . here are some key aspects related to the genetic factors of type 2 diabetes : 1. family history : - inheritance : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases if there is a family history of the condition . individuals with a first-degree relative ( parent or sibling ) with type 2 diabetes are at a higher risk . - polygenic inheritance : multiple genes contribute to diabetes risk , and it often involves polygenic inheritance , meaning that several genes collectively influence susceptibility . 2. genetic variants and mutations : - common variants : there are common genetic variants associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . these variants are often identified through genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) . - rare mutations : in some cases , rare mutations in specific genes can significantly increase the risk of diabetes . examples include mutations in the hnf1 a and hnf4 a genes . 3. insulin resistance and beta cell function : - genes influencing insulin sensitivity : genetic factors can impact insulin sensitivity , affecting how effectively cells respond to insulin . variations in genes like tcf7 l2 are associated with insulin resistance . - beta cell function genes : genes involved in the function of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas , such as those encoding for proinsulin processing , can influence diabetes risk . 4. epigenetic modifications : - environmental influence on gene expression : epigenetic modifications , such as dna methylation and histone modification , can influence how genes related to glucose metabolism are expressed . - lifestyle and environmental factors : environmental factors , including diet and lifestyle , can interact with genetic factors and contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . 5. interaction with lifestyle factors : - gene-environment interaction : genetic factors interact with lifestyle and environmental factors , such as diet , physical activity , and obesity , influencing the overall risk of type 2 diabetes . - obesity-related genes : some genes are associated with an increased risk of obesity , which is a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 6. mitochondrial dna : - mitochondrial involvement : mitochondria , the energy-producing structures in cells , have their own dna . variations in mitochondrial dna have been studied in relation to type 2 diabetes . 7. ethnic and racial differences : - population-specific variations : there are ethnic and racial differences in the prevalence of certain genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes . different populations may have unique genetic risk profiles . 8. genetic testing : - risk prediction : genetic testing can provide information about an individual 's genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . however , it 's important to note that genetic testing is only one aspect of overall risk assessment , and lifestyle factors also play a significant role . diabetes mellitus type 2. what is it ? diabetes is a common health problem in the u.s. and the world . in diabetes , the body does not use the food it digests well . it 1s hard for the body to use carbohydrates and fats . the main marker of diabetes is high blood sugar ( glucose ) . your blood sugar 1s kept in check by insulin . insulin is a hormone that is made in the pancreas . when you get diabetes , it is related to two things : the amount of insulin your body makes how well your bodys cells use insulin . there are two different types of diabetes : type and type 2. only about 5 of people have type 1. type 1 used to be called other names ( juvenile diabetes , insulin-dependent diabetes ) . in type 1 , the pancreas does not make insulin . it usually starts as a child or teen . type 2 often starts after age 40. type 2 used to be called other names too ( adult-onset diabetes ) . obese teens can also get type 2. in type 2 , your pancreas makes insulin . but , it does not make enough insulin . or , your body can not use the insulin as well . this often happens when you are obese . at first , your body will make more insulin to try to keep up . but , when the body can no longer keep up , diabetes comes on . type 2 often runs in families . symptoms symptoms of type 2 come from high blood sugar . they include : frequent urination , extreme thirst and hunger , weight loss , more likely to get skin and vaginal infections , infections or cuts that heal very slowly or not at all . diabetes education blood sugar that is not in control can lead to coma . there are two types of comas : the form that happens in type diabetes ( called ketoacidosis ) the form that happens in type 2 diabetes ( called hyperosmolar ) you may take insulin or pills to make your blood sugar go down . if your blood sugar drops too far you will get low blood sugar ( called hypoglycemia ) . low blood sugar has symptoms . they include : sweating trembling dizziness hunger confusion seizures loss of consciousness . blood sugar that stays high leads to long term problems from diabetes . you may not notice these problems for years . these are some : damage to the eyes ( called retinopathy ) can cause blindness . damage to the nerves ( called neuropathy ) can cause numbness , tingling and pain in your feet , legs , and arms . usually people feel it in the feet first . damage to the kidneys ( called nephropathy ) can cause your kidneys to stop working . you need your kidneys to get rid of waste products . you are also more likely to get heart disease . your heart has arteries that carry blood to the rest of your body . the trouble comes on when your arteries get narrow ( called atherosclerosis ) . then , blood does not flow well to parts of the body . this can happen 1n different parts of the body : heart , brain , legs . and , it leads to different problems : coronary heart disease ( heart ) cerebrovascular disease ( brain ) peripheral artery disease ( legs ) diabetes education symptoms include : chest pain heart attack heart failure stroke leg pain when you walk or exercise that feels better when you rest . you may have trouble getting blood to your legs and feet . this can cause foot ulcers and infections . the ulcers and infection can cause tissue to die ( called gangrene ) . this in turn may lead to amputation . what your doctor looks for your doctor will look for signs of diabetes . obesity , especially around the middle ( abdominal obesity ) . this is a waist that is more than 40 inches around in men or 35 inches around in women . high blood pressure signs of eye disease on eye examination decreased feeling and reflexes in the legs poor pulses in the feet blisters , ulcers or infections of the feet abnormal heart rhythm your doctor will also do lab tests . fasting blood sugar ( this tests your blood sugar before you have had anything to eat or drink . ) hemoglobin alc ( this test measures your average blood sugar level over the past 2 to 3 months . ) lipid profile ( this measures cholesterol , triglycerides , hdl and ldl cholesterol . it tells how likely it is that your arteries are narrowed . ) blood creatinine and urine microalbumin ( these tests look for signs of kidney disease . ) your doctor may also do an eye exam . heshe will look for early signs of eye disease . your doctor may also do a foot and ankle exam . heshe will diabetes education touch your foot with a small wire . this tests whether you can feel the wire on your feet and ankles . diagnosis your doctor will use your fasting blood tests to see if you have diabetes . your blood sugar should not be more than 126 mgdl on this test . you have diabetes if : your blood sugar is more than 126 , and you number stays high on more than one fasting test . expected duration there is no cure for diabetes . it lasts your whole life . type 2 can get much better in some obese people who lose weight and keep it off . prevention you can help prevent type 2 diabetes . you should keep your body weight within the normal range for your height . this is key if diabetes runs in your family . if you already have diabetes , its not too late . you can delay or stop later problems ( retinopathy , neuropathy , nephropathy ) . be sure to keep tight control of your blood sugar . there are ways to lower your risk of heart problems . you should not smoke . here are risk factors you can help control : high blood pressure high blood fats ( cholesterol and triglycerides ) obesity treatment and management in most people who have type 2 diabetes , treatment starts with weight . diet and exercise are used for weight loss . the diet is like ones used to lower bad fats and stop risk of heart disease . most people who have type 2 can control their blood sugar with pills at first . these include ones in the table . you may use pills for many years . but , over time , you may need insulin . or , you may need insulin right away . you should talk to your doctor about which medicine 1s right for you . metformin is suggested as the first one to try . diabetes education medicine class how it works sulfonylureas repaglinide ( prandin ) increases the amount of nateglinide ( starlix ) insulin released by your pancreas biguanide metformin lowers the amount of ( glucophage ) sugar produced by the liver , helps your body use insulin better thiazolidinediones rosiglitazone helps your body use ( avandia ) insulin better pioglitazone ( actos ) alpha-glucosidase acarbose ( precose ) delays the absorption inhibitors of sugars from the intestine the pills used to treat type 2 diabetes can have many side effects . see the table for the major ones . sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) weight gain metformin insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) thiazolidinedione insulin or low blood sugar sulfonylureas ( hypoglycemia ) metformin nausea and diarrhea ( less common if you take the medicine with a meal ) life threatening problems for people who already have liver or kidney disease diabetes education thiazolindinediones can affect your liver so you need to have routine blood tests extreme gas and bloating you should treat high bad cholesterol ( ldl ) . medicines that work to lower this are in the table . statins to lower ldl cholesterol lovastatin , pravastatin , simvastatin , fluvastatin , atorvastatin , rosuvastatin bile acid sequestrants to lower ldl cholestyramine ( questran ) , cholesterol colestipol ( colestid ) , colesevelam ( welchol ) new medicine to lower ldl cholesterol ezetimibe ( zetia ) medicines to lower triglycerides gemfibrozil , fenofibrate to control diabetes you should watch your diet , keep fit , and take your pills . if this is not enough , you may need to take insulin each day . you may also need to stick to a meal plan and eat meals at regular times . this will lessen your chances of having low blood sugar . test your blood sugar each day . this is a key part of managing your diabetes . this is true no matter which medicines you take . you will use a tiny needle ( called a lancet ) to get a small bit of blood . the fingertip is usually the place that is used . the testing meter will tell you how much sugar is in your blood . you should know the target ranges for your blood sugar . 90-120 mgdl before you have had anything to eat or drink 120-180 mgdl after meals if you know your blood sugar level you can choose types and amounts of food . you can also choose how to keep active . if your blood sugar is always diabetes education in the target range , you are not cured . it means that you are doing a good job of managing your diabetes . you will have a better chance at a good quality of life . it is less likely that you will have long term problems from diabetes . when to call your doctor with diabetes , you are at higher risk for loss of body fluids ( dehydration ) . call the doctor if you have nausea or vomiting that lasts . follow the testing schedule your doctor gives you for sick days . this should tell you how often to test : your blood sugar your urine for ketones . call your doctor right away if : you have blood sugars that are very high ( more than 400 500 mgdl ) . your doctor may want you to call before it gets that high . you have large amounts of ketones in your urine . have your family call the doctor right away if you show these signs : dehydration dry skin nausea vomiting confusion coma these are signs of severe high blood sugar problems ( ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar coma ) . prognosis type 2 diabetes can have a good outcome . there are things you must do to help . control your blood sugar . maintain a normal weight . reduce your risk factors for heart disease . diabetes education he incidence of type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) is on the rise in youth in the us and worldwide . t2d is character ized by hyperglycemia from a combination of insulin resistance and relative deficiency of insulin secretion . the contribution of insulin resistance to diabetes pathogenesis explains the clinical association of diabetes with obesity and , subsequently , the coincidence of increasing t2d prevalence with increasing prevalence and severity of obesity in children . differences have been described in the natural history of youth-onset t2d and adult-onset t2d . compared with adults , t2d in youth appears to progress more rapidly , with higher rates of metformin treatment failure and more rapid rates of beta cell decline . the presence of diabetes encumbers those affected with a long-term burden of chronic disease and an increased risk of cardiovascular and microvascular complications . this risk increases with the duration of the disease , putting children with t2d at extremely high risk for complications . follow-up data from both the search for diabetes in youth study and the treatment options for diabetes in youth ( today ) trial have found a substantial presence of diabetes complications as early as adolescence and young adulthood . moreover , the prevalence of complications and overall mortality are higher in youth with t2d compared with adults with t2d or even youth with type 1 diabetes . this burden of disease underscores the need to improve our understanding of diabetes risk , prevention , and optimal treatment in youth . t2d is a complex , multifactorial disease influenced by both environmental factors and genetic variation as well as their interactions . the heritability of t2d is demonstrated by both the high concordance rates in identical twins and the typical presence of a family history of t2d in those with the disease . investigations of the genetics of diabetes risk have examined both overall t2d risk as well as individual glycemic traits that may predispose to diabetes , such as fasting glucose levels , insulin secretion , insulin resistance , and 6-cell function . understanding the genetic underpinnings of diabetes risk offers an opportunity to improve both our knowledge of the mechanisms contributing to diabetes pathogenesis and our understanding of how best to individualize diabetes treatment and prevent compli grs genetic risk score gwas genome-wide association study mody maturity-onset diabetes of the young prodigy progress in diabetes genetics in youth t2d type 2 diabetes today treatment options for diabetes in youth cations . here we review the current state of t2d genetics , specifically as it pertains to children and adolescents . monogenic diabetes diabetes as a result of a single gene abnormality , or monogenic diabetes , shares clinical overlap with t2d , particularly t2d in youth . there are 3 major subgroups of monogenic diabetes : neonatal diabetes , syndromic diabetes , and maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) . neonatal diabetes presents in infancy , although only a subset of infants develops diabetes in the neonatal period ( the first 30 days of life ) the majority of patients become symptomatic within the first 6 months of life . syndromic diabetes presents with additional extrapancreatic features , typically also in infancy . mody is characterized by noninsulin-dependent diabetes diagnosed at a young age ( 25 years ) demonstrating an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern . subtypes of mody are based on specific genetic defects , with involvement of different genes associated with differences in clinical and physiologic phenotypes . monogenic diabetes can be caused by pathogenic mutations in genes that disrupt glucose sensing , insulin transcription , the potassiumadenosine triphosphate channel that transduces the signal for insulin release , the insulin gene , or pancreatic development . understanding the genes associated with monogenic forms of diabetes has provided insight into the disease mechanisms of diabetes . eleven different genes have been identified as causal for mody in the online mendelian inheritance in man catalog : hnf4a ( mody 1 ) , gck ( mody 2 ) , hnfia ( mody 3 ) , pdx1 ( mody 4 ) , hnfib ( mody 5 ) , neurodi ( mody 6 ) , cel ( mody 8 ) , ins ( mody 10 ) , abcc8 ( mody 12 ) , kcnj11 ( mody 13 ) , and appli ( mody 14 ) . note that the genes previously reported as causal for mody 7 , mody 9 , and mody 11 are absent from this list , owing to the recent proposal to eliminate them from the list of causal mody genes based on updated genetic evidence . mutations in the hnf4a and hnfia genes lead to abnormal insulin secretion , and mody caused by variants in these genes can be effectively managed with oral sulfonylurea therapy . ? mody caused by pathogenic variants in gck , the gene encoding glucokinase , which phosphorylates glucose to glucose-6-phosphate in pancreatic cells and acts as a glucose sensor , is characterized by a mild , stable hyperglycemia with a low risk of complications that commonly does not require any treatment . given the clinical overlap between t2d and rarer forms of diabetes , a long-held hypothesis is that the genetic underpinnings of both common and rare forms of diabetes might not be entirely distinct . multiple studies have shown that mody affects a small but not insignificant subset of youth with diabetes , including those clinically diagnosed with t2d . the search for diabetes in youth study published the first systematic study of mody prevalence in us youth , which reported a 1.2 overall prevalence of mody . a genetic sequencing study of participants in the today study found that 4.5 carried a pathogenic variant in a mody gene . a larger genetic study conducted by the progress in diabetes genetics in youth ( prodigy ) consortium that included the today cohort , a second cohort recruited by the today researchers for genetic studies , and a subset of the search for diabetes in youth study participants identified a 2.8 incidence of mody . these studies focused on rare , highly penetrant variants in known mody genes . in adult studies of t2d genetics , there is increasing overlap of common variant associations and genes associated with monogenic diabetes . although such associations have not yet been shown in youth with t2d , it is possible that further examination of rarer variants will find associations along a spectrum of disease risk in genes or pathways relevant to diabetes . candidate gene studies many efforts to understand the genetic underpinnings of t2d in children have focused on genetic variants with known associations with glycemic traits or t2d risk in adults , examining whether similar associations exist in youth . individual variants have been shown to have similar associations in children for both fasting glucose and the homeostasis model assessment of cell function . several t2d risk genes have been associated with youth-onset t2d , including tcf7l2 , slc16a11 , and abca1 . genetic risk scores ( grss ) , which allow for the assessment of the aggregate genetic risk of a given trait , have demonstrated association of grss constructed from variants associated in adults with glycemic traits andor t2d risk with fasting glucose and measures of -cell function , as well as measures of insulin resistance in youth . two studies have examined the ability of grss to identify children at risk of progressing to t2d even though the scores were shown to be associated with t2d risk , in one of the studies clinical factors such as body mass index ( bmi ) and family history of t2d had higher predictive utility . explosion of genetic discoveries related to adult t2d with extremely well-powered studies and advanced analytic techniques . at the time of this publication , 400 variants have been associated with t2d in adults . in comparison , large scale studies of pediatric t2d have not been conducted , largely due to limited sample sizes . to address this gap , we and colleagues formed the prodigy consortium , which is a collaboration of 3 research groups : the today study , search for diabetes in youth , and the type 2 diabetes genetic exploration by next-generation sequencing in multi-ethnic samples ( t2d-genes ) consortium . the prodigy study is a collaborative effort to increase understanding of the genetics of t2d in youth by combining the sample sizes and rich phenotypic data of 2 pediatric t2d studies with the genetic prowess and resources of a largescale adult diabetes genetics consortium . in prodigy , we conducted the first gwas for t2d in youth to identify genetic variants specifically predisposing to youth-onset t2d . we performed our genetic analysis in 3006 multiethnic youth with t2d who were autoantibody-negative for selected pancreatic autoantibodies and 6061 adult controls aged 50 years and diabetes-free . we identified 7 genome-wide significant loci , including the novel locus rs10992863 in phf2 with an or of 1.23 for t2d , implying that each copy of the g risk allele conferred a 23 greater odds of having t2d compared with the wildtype a allele . the remaining 6 loci were previously identified in adults and included tcf7l2 , mc4r , cdc123 , kcnqi1 , igfbp2 , and slc16a11 . at the outset of our prodigy collaboration , our hypothesis was that genetic effects were greater in youth with t2d compared with adults , given the extreme t2d phenotype with respect to early age of presentation . to explore this premise , we constructed grss in prodigy from known t2d variants identified in adults . our comparison of the association of the polygenic risk score between youth and adult cases and controls showed a significantly higher or for t2d in the youth analysis compared with the adult analysis , in accordance with our hypothesis . overall , the efforts of the prodigy consortium have provided initial insight into the genetic architecture of t2d in youth and have shown that the genetic architecture of t2d in youth largely overlaps with that in adults but with a greater aggregate genetic risk burden . functional studies of candidate genes are needed to understand how the identified genetic variants affect disease risk . studies evaluating the interplay between lifestyle and genetic factors are also needed to comprehensively evaluate t2d risk in youth . applications of genetics in youth-onset t2d there has been substantive growth in our understanding of the genetics of t2d in youth secondary to large-scale improvements in genotyping technology , next-generation sequencing techniques , and collaborative approaches such as prodigy to increase sample sizes . here we appraise the various applications of genetics as it pertains to pediatric t2d . srinivasan and todd august 2022 characterizing disease subtypes pediatric t2d is a heterogenous disease likely because of differing contributions from both environmental and genetic factors , as well as varying degrees of insulin resistance and 6cell dysfunction among individuals . the benefit of sulfonylureas in mody 3 is a concrete example of how genetics can be used to characterize disease and dictate treatment . although not always as targeted , genetics also can be used to characterize subtypes for the more common form of t2d . a soft clustering approach has been used to deconstruct the heterogeneity of t2d with groups of loci representing various mechanisms of disease based on 6 cell function , insulin resistance , and fat distribution ( figure ) . these efforts to categorize subtypes help to better characterize pathophysiology , with the hope of informing clinical management and the risk of complications in the future . the benefit of using genetic data to characterize disease is that it remains unchanged over an individuals lifetime and can be measured even before symptoms develop , a particularly valuable characteristic for high-risk children who often have very short latent periods before full-blown t2d develops . risk prediction current guidelines from the american diabetes association recommend screening youth with obesity for t2d based on the presence of certain additional risk factors , including a family history of t2d , high-risk raceethnicity , maternal history of gestational diabetes , and physical features associated with insulin resistance , such as acanthosis nigricans . although these criteria allow clinicians to readily identify youth requiring diabetes screening , it is not clear which of these youth will go on to develop t2d . in addition , there is no simple or direct correlation between clinical features as body mass index , fasting insulin level , or c-peptide level and the progression to t2d . in the early days of t2d gwas efforts , studies showed that a polygenic risk score for t2d in adults does not outperform clinical models of prediction , but when added to routine clinical risk factors , genetic information may enhance predictive utility , particularly for populations of younger adults in whom risk factors , such as glucose intolerance , might not have fully manifested . recently , a trans-ancestry polygenic risk score ( prs ) of 1259 754 hapmap3 variants and weights showed that the top 2 of the prs distribution can identify adults with a roughly 2.5- to 4.5-fold increase in t2d risk . using the top 2 of the prs as the classifier , the reported prevalence-adjusted positive predictive value was 0.26 and the negative predictive value was 0.90. although the current clinical utility of prss remains limited , in the future more sophisticated scores derived from diverse populations likely will continue to improve the predictive performance of these scores . for example , the intronic snp rs7903146 in tcf7l2 , which has one of the strongest known effect sizes for common variants in both youth and adults with t2d , ? has been localized to islet-selective open chromatin in 6 cells using a method called formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements sequencing . the highrisk t allele has been associated with increased transcription in islets and increased expression on cellular luciferase assays compared with the c allele , highlighting a mechanism by which this polymorphism may contribute to t2d risk . complementary approaches of studying diabetes and glycemic traits as well as regulatory and functional data can help improve our understanding of the underlying mechanisms contributing to t2d risk and progression . this is particularly important in youth , who have slightly different underlying pathogenic mechanisms compared with adults with t2d , such as 6 cell hyperresponsiveness in the early disease phase and a higher rate of cell decline . predicting response to interventions often in clinical medicine , patients do not respond or have adverse effects to medications that take time to uncover , leading to delays in optimal management , patient dissatisfaction , and wasted resources . genetics may help identify those patients who may benefit the most from a certain intervention , allowing us to stratify patients , which in turn could lead to better targeting of clinical or public health interventions . for example , the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention was effective even in the participants with the greatest genetic risk burden for established insulin resistance variants . in adults , there has been extensive work evaluating the genetic determinants of metformin response , given the significant interindividual variability in metformin response and evidence of significant heritability , with gwass so far identifying 5 variants associated with metformin response . similarly , sulfonylureas are metabolized predominantly by cytochrome p450 2c9 ( cyp2c9 ) , and loss-of-function alleles in cyp2cp have been associated with a greater response to sulfonylureas . there have been no pharmacogenetic studies of t2d in youth reported to date , and this is an area where additional research is needed . for example , 50 of youth on metformin therapy do not have sustained glycemic control , a greater proportion than seen in adults . the mechanisms behind this difference is unclear , and identifying genetic variants associated with metformin response in youth potentially could help elucidate the reasons for treatment failure . conclusions given the exponential rise in the incidence of t2d in youth , the ageressive nature of the disease compared with adults , and the significant heritability of the disease , it is critical that we strive to better understand the genetic basis of t2d in youth . although studies of pediatric t2d genetics have lagged behind adult studies largely because of the difficulty conducting studies with large sample sizes , technological advances and collaborative efforts have helped moved the field forward . however , much remains to be discovered , and further largescale efforts with computational and functional follow-up of findings are needed to continue to advance our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of t2d in youth . the knowledge of genetics can be used to better understand the pathophysiology of the disease in youth , characterize subtypes , assist with disease prediction , and aid the targeting of pharmacologic interventions with the ultimate goal of developing a personalized medicine approach to tackle youth-onset t2d . learn about diabetes you can learn how to take care of your diabetes and prevent some of the serious problems diabetes can cause . the more you know , the better you can manage your diabetes . share this booklet with your family and friends so they will understand more about diabetes . also make sure to ask your health care team any questions you might have . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is when your blood glucose * , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles . your blood carries glucose to all of your body ’ s cells to use for energy . your pancreas an organ , located between your stomach and spine , that helps with digestion releases a hormone it makes , called insulin , into your blood . insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your body ’ s cells . sometimes your body doesn ’ t make enough insulin or the insulin doesn ’ t work the way it should . glucose then stays in your blood and doesn ’ t reach your cells . your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . what is prediabetes ? prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . with prediabetes , your chances of getting type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke are higher . with some weight loss and moderate physical activity , you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you can even return to normal glucose levels , possibly without taking any medicines . caution : take steps to prevent type 2 diabetes now . prediabetes diabetes normal what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? the signs and symptoms of diabetes are being very thirsty urinating often feeling very hungry feeling very tired losing weight without trying sores that heal slowly dry , itchy skin feelings of pins and needles in your feet losing feeling in your feet blurry eyesight some people with diabetes don ’ t have any of these signs or symptoms . the only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test . what kind of diabetes do you have ? the three main types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . people can develop diabetes at any age . both women and men can develop diabetes . type 1 diabetes type 1 diabetes , which used to be called juvenile diabetes , develops most often in young people ; however , type 1 diabetes can also develop in adults . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin because the body ’ s immune system , which normally protects you from infection by getting rid of bacteria , viruses , and other harmful substances , has attacked and destroyed the cells that make insulin . treatment for type 1 diabetes includes taking shots , also called injections , of insulin . sometimes taking medicines by mouth . making healthy food choices . being physically active . controlling your blood pressure levels . blood pressure is the force of blood flow inside your blood vessels . controlling your cholesterol levels . cholesterol is a type of fat in your body ’ s cells , in your blood , and in many foods . type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes , which used to be called adult-onset diabetes , can affect people at any age , even children . however , type 2 diabetes develops most often in middle- aged and older people . people who are overweight and inactive are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance a condition that occurs when fat , muscle , and liver cells do not use insulin to carry glucose into the body ’ s cells to use for energy . as a result , the body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas keeps up with the added demand by making more insulin . over time , the pancreas doesn ’ t make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . if your pancreas can no longer make enough insulin , you will need to treat your type 2 diabetes . treatment for type 2 diabetes includes using diabetes medicines making healthy food choices being physically active controlling your blood pressure levels controlling your cholesterol levels gestational diabetes gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . all women have insulin resistance late in their pregnancy . if the pancreas doesn ’ t make enough insulin during pregnancy , a woman develops gestational diabetes . overweight or obese women have a higher chance of gestational diabetes . also , gaining too much weight during pregnancy may increase your likelihood of developing gestational diabetes . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . however , a woman who has had gestational diabetes is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes later in life . babies born to mothers who had gestational diabetes are also more likely to develop obesity and type 2 diabetes . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what i need to know about gestational diabetes at why do you need to take care of your diabetes ? over time , diabetes can lead to serious problems with your blood vessels , heart , nerves , kidneys , mouth , eyes , and feet . these problems can lead to an amputation , which is surgery to remove a damaged toe , foot , or leg , for example . the most serious problem caused by diabetes is heart disease . when you have diabetes , you are more than twice as likely as people without diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke . with diabetes , you may not have the usual signs or symptoms of a heart attack . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . who is part of your health care team ? most people with diabetes get care from primary care providers , such as internists , family physicians , or pediatricians . a team of health care providers can also improve your diabetes care . in addition to a primary care provider , your health care team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care a dietitian , a nurse , or a certified diabetes educator experts who can provide information about managing diabetes a counselor or mental health professional a pharmacist a dentist an ophthalmologist or an optometrist for eye care a podiatrist for foot care if diabetes makes you feel sad or angry , or if you have other problems that worry you , you should talk with a counselor or mental health professional . your doctor or certified diabetes educator can help you find a counselor . talk with your doctor about what vaccines and immunizations , or shots , you should get to keep from getting sick . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . be sure you understand everything you need to know about taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . take care of your diabetes each day do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . these things may seem like a lot to do at first . just make small changes until these steps become a normal part of your day . follow your healthy eating plan ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . this plan , often called medical nutrition therapy , will include regular monitoring by your dietitian and education about how to adjust your eating habits as the need occurs . medical nutrition therapy is usually covered by insurance or medicare as long as your doctor refers you . your dietitian can help you plan meals that include foods that you and your family like and that are good for you . your healthy eating plan will include breads , cereals , rice , and whole grains fruits and vegetables meat and meat substitutes dairy products healthy fats your plan will also help you learn how to eat the right amount , or portions , of food . making good food choices will help you reach and stay at a healthy weight keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels under control prevent heart and blood vessel disease if you take insulin , look at the white boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . don ’ t skip meals , especially if you ’ ve already taken your insulin , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . learn more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . if you don ’ t take insulin , look at the blue boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . don ’ t skip meals , especially if you take diabetes medicines , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . read more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . eat several small meals during the day instead of big meals . read more about healthy eating plans in what i need to know about eating and diabetes at be physically active physical activity helps you stay healthy . physical activity is especially good if you have diabetes because it helps you reach or stay at a healthy weight helps insulin work better to lower your blood glucose levels is good for your heart and lungs gives you more energy even small amounts of physical activity help manage diabetes , such as when you are physically active at work or home . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . not all physical activity has to take place at the same time . increase daily activity by decreasing time spent watching tv or at the computer . children and adolescents should limit screen time not related to school to less than 2 hours a day . limiting screen time can help you meet your physical activity goal . people with diabetes should always talk with a doctor before starting a new physical activity program . do aerobic activities , such as brisk walking , which use the body ’ s large muscles to make the heart beat faster . the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head , shoulder , and hip movements . do activities to strengthen muscles and bone , such as sit-ups or lifting weights . aim for two times a week . stretch to increase flexibility , lower stress , and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity . many activities can help your child and your family stay active and have fun . consider activities that they might enjoy and can stick with , such as playing basketball dancing to music with friends taking a walk or a bike ride physical activity helps you stay healthy . action steps if you take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . don ’ t start a physical activity program when your blood glucose levels are high or if you have ketones in your blood or urine . read more about ketones in the section monitor your diabetes . don ’ t be physically active right before you go to bed because it could cause low blood glucose while you sleep . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . ask your doctor about whether you need to eat before you are physically active . when you are being physically active , carry glucose tablets or a carbohydrate-rich snack or drink with you , such as fruit or juice , in case your blood glucose levels go too low . read more about increasing your physical activity in what i need to know about physical activity and diabetes at take your medicines as prescribed if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it doesn ’ t make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . diabetes medicines most people with type 2 diabetes use medicines other than insulin shots . people with type 2 diabetes use medicine to help their blood glucose levels stay in their target range . if your body makes insulin and the insulin doesn ’ t lower your blood glucose levels enough , you may need to take one or more medicines . diabetes medicines come in pill and shot form . some people take diabetes medicines once a day and other medicines more often . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . sometimes , people who take diabetes medicines may also need insulin shots for a while . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . if you get sick or have surgery , your diabetes medicines may no longer work to lower your blood glucose levels . always check with your doctor before you stop taking your diabetes medicines . insulin shots only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take and which of the following ways to take insulin is best for you : insulin shot . you ’ ll use a needle attached to a syringe a hollow tube with a plunger that you fill with a dose of insulin . some people use an insulin pen , a pen like device with a needle and a cartridge of insulin . never share insulin needles or insulin pens , even with family . insulin pump . an insulin pump is a small device filled with insulin that you wear on your belt or keep in your pocket . the pump connects to a small , plastic tube and a small needle . you or your doctor inserts the needle under your skin . the needle can stay in for several days . insulin jet injector . this device sends a fine spray of insulin through your skin with high-pressure air instead of a needle . insulin injection port . you or your doctor inserts a small tube just beneath your skin , where it remains in place for several days . you can inject insulin into the end of the tube instead of through your skin . read more about ways to take insulin in alternative devices for taking insulin at only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take . other medicines your doctor may prescribe other medicines to help with problems related to diabetes , such as aspirin for heart health cholesterol-lowering medicines medicines for high blood pressure remembering to take your medicines at the correct times each day can be challenging . many people find that keeping a weekly pill box with separate boxes for each day , and even separate boxes for morning and evening , can help . also ask your health care team to update your list of medicines at each visit so you always have an accurate list of what medicines to take and when . read more about diabetes and medicines in what ineed to know about diabetes medicines at monitor your diabetes check your blood glucose levels checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . if your blood has too much or too little glucose , you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . a member of your health care team will show you how to check your blood glucose levels using a blood glucose meter . your health care team can teach you how to prick your finger to get a drop of blood for testing use your meter to find out your blood glucose level from your drop of blood read more in continuous glucose monitoring at your health insurance or medicare may pay for the blood glucose meter and test strips you need . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check before and after eating , before and after physical activity , before bed , and sometimes in the middle of the night . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . target range for blood glucose levels most people with diabetes should try to keep their blood glucose levels as close as possible to the level of someone who doesn ’ t have diabetes . this normal target range is about 70 to 130. the closer to normal your blood glucose levels are , the lower your chance of developing serious health problems . ask your doctor what your target levels are and when you should check your blood glucose levels with a meter . make copies of the chart in the section your diabetes care records to take with you when you visit your doctor . reaching your target range all of the time can be hard . remember , the closer you get to your target range , the better you will feel . the a1 ctest another test for blood glucose , the a1c also called the hemoglobin a1c test , hb a1c , or glycohemoglobin testis a blood test that reflects the average level of glucose in your blood during the past 2 to 3 months . you should have the a1c test at least twice a year . if your result is not on target , your doctor may have you take the test more often to see if your a1c improves . for the test , your doctor will draw a sample of your blood during an office visit or send you to a lab to have your blood drawn . your a1 ctest result is given as a percentage . your a1c result plus the record of your blood glucose numbers show whether your blood glucose levels are under control . if your a1c result is too high , you may need to change your diabetes treatment plan . your health care team can help you decide what part of your plan to change . if your a1c result is on target , then your diabetes treatment plan is working . the lower your a1c result , the lower your chance of having diabetes problems . talk with your doctor about what your a1c target should be . your personal target may be above or below the target shown in the chart . a1c targets target for most people with diabetes below 7 percent time to change my diabetes care plan 8 percent or above a1c targets can also depend on how long you have had diabetes whether or not you have other health problems read more about a1c targets at tests for ketones you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you ’ re sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. your body makes ketones when you burn fat instead of glucose for energy . if you have too many ketones , you are more likely to have a serious condition called ketoacidosis . if not treated , ketoacidosis can cause death . signs of ketoacidosis are vomiting weakness fast breathing sweet-smelling breath ketoacidosis is more likely in people with type 1 diabetes . your doctor or diabetes educator will show you how to test for ketones . keep daily records make copies of the daily diabetes record at the end of this booklet . then , write down the results of your blood glucose checks each day . you may also want to record what you ate , how you felt , and whether you were physically active . bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . they can use your records to see whether you need changes in your diabetes medicines or in your healthy eating plan . action steps if you take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take insulin the amount and type of insulin you take what types of physical activity you do and for how long when and what you eat whether you have ketones in your blood or urine when you are sick action steps if you don ’ t take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take your medicines what types of physical activity you do and for how long learn about high and low blood glucose levels sometimes , no matter how hard you try to keep your blood glucose levels in your target range , they will be too high or too low . blood glucose that ’ s too high or too low can make you feel sick . if you try to control your high or low blood glucose and cant , you may become even sicker and need help . talk with your doctor to learn how to handle these emergencies . learn about high blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . see the chart on page 54. high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you don ’ t have enough insulin in your body . high blood glucose can happen if you miss taking your diabetes medicines eat too much don ’ t get enough physical activity have an infection get sick are stressed take medicines that can cause high blood glucose be sure to tell your doctor about other medicines you take . when you ’ re sick , be sure to check your blood glucose levels and keep taking your diabetes medicines . read more about how to take care of yourself when you ’ re sick in the section take care of your diabetes during special times or events . signs that your blood glucose levels may be too high are the following : feeling thirsty feeling weak or tired headaches urinating often having trouble paying attention blurry vision yeast infections very high blood glucose may also make you feel sick to your stomach . if your blood glucose levels are high much of the time , or if you have symptoms of high blood glucose , call your doctor . you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . learn about low blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . low blood glucose can come on fast and can be caused by taking too much diabetes medicine missing or delaying a meal being more physically active than usual drinking alcoholic beverages sometimes , medicines you take for other health problems can cause your blood glucose levels to drop . signs your blood glucose levels may be too low are the following : hunger dizziness or shakiness confusion being pale sweating more weakness anxiety or moodiness headaches a fast heartbeat if your blood glucose levels drop lower , you could have severe hypoglycemia , where you pass out or have a seizure . a seizure occurs when cells in the brain release a rush of energy that can cause changes in behavior or muscle contractions . some seizures are life threatening . if you have any of these symptoms , check your blood glucose levels . if your blood glucose levels are less than 70 , have one of the following right away : three or four glucose tablets one serving of glucose gel the amount equal to 15 grams of carbohydrates 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of fruit juice 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of a regular non-diet softdrink 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of milk five or six pieces of hard candy 1 tablespoon of sugar , syrup , or honey have one of these foods or drinks when your blood glucose levels are low . after 15 minutes , check your blood glucose levels again . repeat these steps until your blood glucose levels are 70 or above . if it will be at least 1 hour before your next meal , eat a snack . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . a glucagon kit has a vial of glucagon , a syringe , and a needle to inject the glucagon . given as a shot , the glucagon quickly raises blood glucose . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you ’ ll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon kit is not available . action steps if you take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor if you ’ ve passed out from low blood glucose . ask your doctor about glucagon . glucagon is a medicine that raises blood glucose . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . when you have severe hypoglycemia , someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon shot is not available . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor about other medicines you are taking . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicines might cause low blood glucose . read more about low blood glucose in hypoglycemia at tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of day or night , several times in a row . prevent diabetes problems taking care of your diabetes every day will help your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels stay in your target ranges . caring for your diabetes can also help prevent other health problems over the years . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . types of diabetes problems diabetes problems can damage parts of the body such as the heart blood vessels eyes kidneys nerves heart and blood vessel disease can lead to heart attacks and strokes . nerve damage can lead to a loss of feeling in the feet , which may lead to an amputation . you will want to take steps to prevent these diabetes problems . read more about preventing diabetes problems in the following booklets at these booklets are also available in spanish and large-print versions : prevent diabetes problems : keep your diabetes under control prevent diabetes problems : keep your eyes healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your feet healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your heart and blood vessels healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your kidneys healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your mouth healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your nervous system healthy take care of your diabetes during special times or events diabetes is part of your life . you can learn how to take care of yourself and your diabetes when you ’ re sick , when you ’ re at school or work , when you ’ re away from home , when an emergency or a natural disaster happens , or when you ’ re thinking about having a baby or are pregnant . when you ’ re sick having a cold , the flu , or an infection can raise your blood glucose levels . being sick puts stress on your body . your body releases hormones to deal with the stress and to fight the sickness . higher hormone levels can also cause high blood glucose levels . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you ’ re sick . the first step is to talk with your health care team and write down how often to check your blood glucose levels whether you should check for ketones in your blood or urine whether you should change your usual dose of your diabetes medicines what to eat and drink when to call your doctor action steps if you take insulin take your insulin , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . ask your health care team about how to adjust your insulin dose based on your blood glucose test results . action steps if you don ’ t take insulin take your diabetes medicines , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . people who are sick sometimes feel as though they can ’ t eat as much or can ’ t keep food down , which can cause low blood glucose levels . consuming carbohydrate-rich drinks or snacks can help prevent low blood glucose . if you are sick , your health care team may recommend the following : check your blood glucose levels at least four times a day and write down the results in your record book . keep your results handy so you can report the results to your health care team . keep taking your diabetes medicines , even if you can ’ t eat . drink at least 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of water or other calorie-free , caffeine-free liquid every hour while you ’ re awake . if you can ’ t eat your usual food , try eating or drinking any of the following to prevent low blood glucose levels : juice saltine crackers dry toast soup broth or bouillon ice pops or sherbet gelatin that isn ’ t sugar-free milk yogurt soda that isn ’ t sugar-free your doctor may ask that you call right away if your blood glucose levels are above 240 even though you ’ ve taken your diabetes medicines your urine or blood ketone levels are above normal you vomit more than once you have diarrhea for more than 6 hours you have trouble breathing you have a high fever you can ’ t think clearly or you feel more drowsy than usual you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . when you ’ re at school or work take care of your diabetes when you ’ re at school or at work : follow your healthy eating plan . take your medicines and check your blood glucose levels as usual . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . keep snacks nearby and carry some with you at all times to treat low blood glucose . if you have trained diabetes staff at your school or work , tell them that you have diabetes . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . when you ’ re away from home these tips can help you when you ’ re away from home : get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you ’ re going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . follow your healthy eating plan as much as possible when you eat out . always carry a snack with you in case you have to wait for a waiter to serve you . limit alcoholic beverages . ask your health care team how many alcoholic beverages you can safely drink . eat something when you drink to prevent low blood glucose . if you ’ re taking a long trip by car , check your blood glucose levels before driving . stop and check your blood glucose levels every 2 hours . always carry your diabetes medicines and supplies in the car where you can reach them in case your blood glucose levels drop too low . in case you can ’ t leave for home on time , bring twice the amount of diabetes supplies and medicines you normally need . take comfortable , well-fitting shoes on vacation . you ’ ll probably be walking more than usual . keep your medical insurance card , emergency phone numbers , and a first aid kit handy . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . if you ’ re going to be away for a long time , ask your doctor for a written prescription for your diabetes medicines and the name of a doctor in the place you ’ re going to visit . don ’ t count on buying extra supplies when you ’ re traveling , especially if you ’ re going to another country . different countries use different kinds of diabetes medicines . when you ’ re flying on a plane these tips can help you when you ’ re flying on a plane : ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines , especially your insulin , if you ’ re traveling across time zones . take a letter from your doctor stating you have diabetes . the letter should include a list of all the medical supplies and medicines you need on the plane . in the letter , the doctor should also include a list of any devices that shouldn ’ t go through an x-ray machine . carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . if you use an insulin pump , ask airport security to check the device by hand . x-ray machines can damage insulin pumps , whether the pump is on your body or in your luggage . when on a plane , get up from your seat and walk around when possible . read more about planning for travel and travel safety if you have diabetes in have diabetes . will travel . at bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . action steps if you take insulin when you travel , take a special insulated bag to carry your insulin to keep it from freezing or getting too hot bring extra supplies for taking insulin and testing your blood glucose levels in case of loss or breakage ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for taking insulin and testing blood glucose action steps if you don ’ t take insulin when you travel , ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines if you ’ re traveling across time zones carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for testing blood glucose when an emergency or a natural disaster happens everyone with diabetes should be prepared for emergencies and natural disasters , such as power outages or hurricanes . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes , such as a blood glucose meter , lancets , and testing strips your diabetes medicines insulin , syringes , and an insulated bag to keep insulin cool , if you take insulin a glucagon kit if you take insulin or if recommended by your doctor glucose tablets and other food or drinks to treat low blood glucose antibiotic cream or ointment a copy of your medical information , including a list of your conditions , medicines , and recent lab test results a list of your prescription names with dosage information and prescription numbers from your pharmacy phone numbers for the american red cross and other disaster relief groups you also might want to include some food that doesn ’ t spoil , such as canned or dried food , along with bottled water . read more about preparing for an emergency at the centers for disease control and prevention emergency preparedness and you website at preparedness . if you ’ re a woman and planning a pregnancy keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . even before you become pregnant , your blood glucose levels should be close to the normal range . your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you ’ re already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . you can take steps to bring your blood glucose levels close to normal . your insulin needs may change when you ’ re pregnant . your doctor may want you to take more insulin and check your blood glucose levels more often . if you plan to have a baby , work with your health care team to get your blood glucose levels as close to the normal range as possible see a doctor who has experience taking care of pregnant women with diabetes dont smoke , drink alcoholic beverages , or use harmful drugs follow your healthy eating plan be sure to have your eyes , heart and blood vessels , blood pressure , and kidneys checked . your doctor should also check for nerve damage . pregnancy can make some health problems worse . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what i need to know about preparing for pregnancy if i have diabetes at your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you ’ re already pregnant , see your doctor right away . your diabetes care records make copies of the charts in this section . these charts list important things you should discuss with your doctor at each visit . things to discuss with your health care team at each visit date : whom you visited : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood glucose levels share your blood glucose records . your doctor will ask how you are checking your blood glucose levels to make sure you are doing it right . mention if you often have low or high blood glucose . shared blood glucose records ? checked meter ? practiced blood glucose reading ? shared high or low blood glucose ? your weight talk about how much you should weigh . talk about ways to reach your target weight that will work for you.my weight now is . my target weight is . steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood pressure ask about ways to reach your target . the target for most people with diabetes is below 140/80 unless your doctor helps you set a different target . my blood pressure now is . my target blood pressure is . steps to take : your medicines talk about any problems you have had with your medicines . ask if you should take a low-dose aspirin every day to lower your chance of getting heart disease . shared medicine problems ? take aspirin ? yes no steps to take : your feet ask to have your feet checked for problems . talk about any problems you are having with your feet , such as numbness , tingling , or sores that heal slowly . checked feet ? shared problems ? steps to help with my feet : your physical activity plan talk about how often you are physically active , the type of physical activity you do , and any problems you have when being physically active . shared activities ? steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your healthy eating plan talk about what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat . shared eating habits ? steps to take : your feelings if you feel stressed , ask about ways to cope . talk about whether you are feeling sad . shared stress and problems ? steps to take : your smoking if you smoke , ask for help with quitting . shared smoking habits ? steps to take : this chart lists important tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year . tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year test instruction results or dates a1 ctest have this blood test at least twice a year . your result will tell you what your average blood glucose level was for the past 2 to 3 months . date : a1 c : next test : blood lipid ( fats ) lab tests get a blood test to check your total cholesterol aim for below 200 ldl , or bad , cholesterol aim for below 100 hdl , or good , cholesterol men : aim for above 40 ; women : aim for above 50 triglycerides aim for below 150 date : total cholesterol : ldl : hdl : triglycerides : next test : kidney function tests once a year , get a urine test to check for protein . at least once a year , get a blood test to check for creatinine . date : urine protein : creatinine : next test : test instructions results or dates dilated eye exam see an eye doctor once a year for a complete eye exam that includes using drops in your eyes to dilate your pupils . if you are pregnant , have a complete eye exam in your first 3 months of pregnancy . have another complete eye exam 1 year after your baby is born . date : result : next test : dental exam see your dentist twice a year for a cleaning and checkup . date : result : next test : pneumonia vaccine ( recommended by the centers for disease control and prevention cdc ) get the vaccine if you are younger than 64. if you ’ re older than 64 and your shot was more than 5 years ago , get another vaccine . date received : test instructions results or dates flu vaccine ( recommended by the cdc ) get a flu shot each year . date received : hepatitis b vaccine ( recommended by the cdc ) get this vaccine if you are age 19 to 59 and have not had this vaccine . consider getting this vaccine if you are 60 or older and have not had this vaccine . date of 1st dose : date of 2nd dose : date of 3rd dose : 55 daily diabetes record page week starting other blood glucose breakfast blood glucose medicine lunch blood glucose medicine dinner blood glucose medicine bedtime blood glucose medicine notes : ( special events , sick days , exercise ) monday tuesday wednesday thursday friday saturday sunday you can also find a food and activity tracker at points to remember diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin . type 2 diabetes develops when , over time , the pancreas doesnt make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . people who are overweight and inactive are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it doesn ’ t make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you ’ re sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you don ’ t have enough insulin in your body . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . if you have severe hypoglycemia , youll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you ’ re sick . you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you ’ re going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . when traveling , carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes in the disaster kit . keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . if you ’ re already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . background : diabetes is increasing at an alarming rate in asian countries including the philippines . both the prevalence and incidence of type diabetes ( t2d ) continue to increase with a commensurate upward trend in the prevalence of prediabetes . objectives : the aim of this study was to review the prevalence of diabetes in the philippines and to describe extensively the characteristics of diabetes care in the philippines from availability of diagnostics tests to the procurement of medications . methods : a literature search was performed using the search words diabetes care and philippines . articles that were retrieved were reviewed for relevance and then synthesized to highlight key features . findings : the prevalence of diabetes in the philippines is increasing . rapid urbanization with increasing dependence on electronic gadgets and sedentary lifestyle contributes significantly to this epidemic . diabetes care in the philippines is disadvantaged and challenged with respect to resources , government support , and economics . the national insurance system does not cover comprehensive diabetes care in a preventive model and private insurance companies only offer limited diabetes coverage . thus , most patients rely on out-of-pocket expenses , namely , laboratory procedures and daily medications . consequently , poor pharmacotherapy adherence impairs prevention of complications . moreover , behavioral modifications are difficult due to cultural preferences for a traditional diet of refined sugar , including white rice and bread . conclusions : translating clinical data into practice in the philippines will require fundamental and transformative changes that increase diabetes awareness , emphasize lifestyle change while respecting cultural preferences , and promote public policy especially regarding the health insurance system to improve overall diabetes care and outcomes . keywords : diabetes , diabetes care , philippines , southeast asia , type 2 diabetes 2015. introduction : diabetes is a chronic disease and is increasing in both prevalence and incidence worldwide . diabetes exerts a major impact in third-world countries , particularly in the philippines . it is said that asia will see the greatest increase in the number of people with diabetes by 2025. this increase in the burden of chronic diseases in asia will significantly affect nations respective health care systems , both acutely and chronically . the philippines is located in southeast asia situated in the western pacific ocean . it is made up of 7101 islands and has approximately 115,831 square miles of total land area , and with a coastline of 22,549 miles , it is considered the fifth longest coastline in the world . three prominent bodies of water surround the archipelago namely , the pacific ocean on the east , the south china sea on the west and north , and the celebes sea on the south . the topography of the larger islands is characterized by rolling hills and high mountains , whereas the smaller islands are mountainous in the interior , surrounded by at low lands , which constitute the coastal rims . each island is accessed via sea transportation using larger vessels or smaller boats , the latter referred to by the natives as bancas . there are about 14 regions , 73 provinces , and 60 cities across the archipelago . therefore , individuals from smaller cities must traverse by land and sea to receive medical care in tertiary hospitals located in major cities . the philippines is unique in that filipinos in different regions of the country speak different dialects but all filipinos can speak one national language called tagalog . the philippines has an estimated population of approximately 101 million as of 2015 and is categorized by the world bank as a lower to middle income country and by the united nations as a country with a developing economy . the gross domestic product of the philippines real growth rate averaged 7.3 % in a report in 2007 , the highest in 31 years . in 2014 , the economy of the philippines grew from 6.1 % in 2014 to 6.5 % in 2015 fueled by sustained increases in private consumption , higher fixed investment , and recovery in exports . the challenge for the government is how to make these economic gains felt among the poorer sectors of society . the recent 2014 poverty incidence stands around 25.8 % . this latest figure is lower than the 2006 recorded official poverty statistic of 26.9 % .5 thus , with eco- nomic growth and decreasing poverty , the philippine government is realigning the national budget to improve social services . more specifically , this will allow an effective population management program focusing on education and healthcare . noncommunicable diseases ( ncd ; noninfectious or nontransmissible diseases ) including diabetes in the philippines account for 6 of the top 10 causes of mortality and are considered a major public health concern . diseases of the heart and vascular system continue to be the leading causes of death , comprising 31 % of all deaths . other ncds include malignant neoplasms , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and chronic kidney disease . what is alarming is that as deaths due to preventable diseases have been on a decline , lifestyle-related diseases due to westernization of the culture have begun to dominate as the leading causes of death , particularly due to cardiovascular diseases , malignant neoplasms , diabetes , and chronic lower respiratory diseases . at present , there are no published nationwide prevalence or incidence studies on type 1 diabetes ( t1d ) . however , 1 survey was done in a municipality of bulacan in central luzon region that showed a very low prevalence of t1d with only 7 cases diagnosed among children aged 0 to 14 years during a 10-year period from 1989 to 1998. a recent survey on pediatric type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) in the philippines also found a low prevalence at 0.91 % . as a result of the low prevalence of t1d , continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) devices and continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion ( insulin pumps ) are not widely used . standard home glucose monitoring devices are readily available and affordable as well as various insulin preparations that are generic and biosimilar via subcutaneous injections . there is little research on stem cell therapy or islet cell transplantation for t1d in the philippines . gestational diabetes ( gdm ) is prevalent in the philippines . published data from the asian federation of endocrine societies study group on diabetes in pregnancy ( asgodip ) showed that the philippines has a gdm prevalence of 14 % in 1203 pregnancies surveyed . because of this high prevalence rate , the unite for diabetes clinical practice guideline ( cpg ) recommends universal gdm screening for the filipino population . the asgodip data found that about 40.4 % of high-risk women were positive for gdm when screening was performed beyond the 26th week of pregnancy . in a cohort of filipino women with gdm delivering babies with macrosomia in the cardinal santos medical center , > 75 % were diagnosed between gestational weeks 26 and 38. in another cohort population from the veterans memorial medical center , 50 % of gdm cases were diagnosed between gestational weeks 31 and 40. the filipino cpg recommends adopting the criteria by the international association of diabetes & pregnancy study groups for interpretation of the 75-g oral glucose tolerance test as gdm screening . t2d is the most common type of diabetes in the philippines . in 2009 , a cohort study derived from the larger population-based investigation in 1998 was revisited and demonstrated a 9-year incidence rate of t2d in the philippines to be around 16.3 % . in the latest survey published by the food and nutrition research institute in the philippines ( the eighth national nutrition survey of 2013 ) , the prevalence of high fasting blood glucose based on the world health organization criteria of > 125 mg/dl for individuals > 20 years old was 5.4 % , an increase of 0.6 % , compared with the same study in 2008. the highest prevalence rate was found among the richest in the wealth index , those living in urban areas , and those in the 60- to 69-year age group in both sexes . these studies show an alarming growth rate of t2d in the philippines commensurate with an upward trend in worldwide prevalence . in the 2014 prevalence estimates published by the international diabetes federation , it is estimated that there are 3.2 million cases of t2d in the philippines with a 5.9 % prevalence rate in adults between the ages of 20 and 79 years . around 1.7 million people with t2d remain undiagnosed . the estimated cost per person with t2 din 2013 in the philippines is $ 205 , which is comparable with neighboring countries such as thailand ( $ 285 ) and indonesia ( $ 174.7 ) . the health care system in the pjilippines : the philippines has a very low physician-to- household ratio . as of 2002 , it was estimated that there were only 12 physicians per 10,000 house-holds , although there were more nurses available , at 61 per 10,000 filipino households . the philippines government health care insurance company philhealth provides benefits for diabetes-related admissions . this is a government corporation that aims to ensure universal health insurance for all filipinos . in 2014 , based on the philhealth circular no . 17s 2014 , new implementing guidelines were released for outpatient coverage for medications for hypertension , diabetes , and dyslipidemia . the stated rationale for this coverage is considering the increasing burden of ncds vis-a-vis the cost of maintenance drugs for these diseases , philhealth primary care benefit 2 package ( pcb2 ) will pay for outpatient medicines for philhealth qualified members or dependents with hypertension , diabetes and dyslipidemia long before their conditions become catastrophic . indigent and sponsored members or their dependents are eligible for the package but only one recipient per family with a 10-year cardiovascular risk of > 30 % can avail of the pcb2 at one time . limited medications were included in the coverage for diabetes , namely only the sulfonylurea glibenclamide and the biguanide metformin , provided on a monthly basis . a price cap , as agreed on with philhealth , is reimbursed to the package provider . these guidelines are obviously superior to no provisions for diabetes medical outpatient care . however , the guidelines are still not sufficiently comprehensive , as reimbursements for medications and overall health coverage remain limited for each family household . philhealth also provides hospitalization benefits but only in accredited institutions with a ceiling price for each diagnosis and procedure . the majority of outpatient services continue to be out- of-pocket expenses unless patients have their own health insurance under the health medical organization system , generally as part of employees benefits while working in private institutions . in effect , the national insurance system is limited and does not cover comprehensive diabetes care in a preventive care model , and moreover , that private insurance companies only offer limited diabetes coverage placing the overall care model at a distinct disadvantage . diabetes clinics in several government hospitals offer free consultations and affordable medicines for the underprivileged . additionally , most city governments also have city health centers , which are called barangay health units . these units offer basic primary health care deliveries . a barangay is the smallest administrative unit of the government in the philippines and is similar to a village . it is at barangay health stations ( bhs ) where health care professionals ( hcps ) are expected to deliver basic diabetes self-management and perform basic measures , such as blood pressure and body mass index calculations . in the city ( or provincial ) health offices , diabetes clubs are established . private-paying individuals receive their outpatient diabetes consultations in tertiary hospital settings where they have a choice of specialists trained in endocrinology , diabetes , and metabolism certified by the philippine society of endocrinology diabetes and metabolism . at present , there are only 7 training institutions accredited by the philippine society of endocrinology , diabetes and metabolism ( psedm ) that provide about 30 certified endocrinologists every year with the balance of diabetologists trained under the auspices of the institute for diabetes foundation . availability of medications : the philippines government has implemented reforms to make diabetes medications readily available and affordable to all filipinos . the philippines generics act of under republic act no . 6675 was passed mainly to improve the supply of medicines for hcps , specifically allowing importation , manufacturing , and encouragement of generics instead of branded medicines . likewise , the philippines department of health established the national drug policy pharmaceutical management unit , or pharma 50 , to reduce prices of medicines by 50 % through parallel drug importation . 24 local government units also have the botika ng barangay ( pharmacy of the village ) program that caters to marginalized underserved communities by providing affordable over-the-counter and selected pre-scription medications at very low prices . in 2008 , the universally accessible cheaper and quality medicines act no . 9502 was passed , which granted the government the power to regulate medicine prices and ensure quality affordable medicines through the bureau of food and drugs . most diabetes medications , both oral antidiabetic ( oad ) and injectable such as insulin and glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists ( glp1-ra ) , are available in the philippines . most of the off-patent diabetes medications are now available as generics . in a 2012 publication , the diabcare study looking at t2d , assessed the status of diabetes care in the philippines and found that of the total sample population , approximately 78.5 % of the patients were on oad , whereas 42 % were on insulin . 27 of the oads , biguanides followed by sulfonylureas were the most frequently prescribed . this practice is understandable considering that these 2 medications are the most cost-effective in the philippines since generic equivalents are readily available and therefore very affordable to the public sector . it is understandable that metformin is frequently prescribed , but the continued prevalence of sulfonylurea prescription in light of deprioritization in virtually all diabetes cpg ( due to high rates of hypoglycemia ) highlights the dominant and continued role of economics as a driver of diabetes care . the most commonly prescribed insulin preparation was the premixed insulin accounting for 43 % , followed by basal insulin ( detemir or glargine ) accounting for 26 % . half of the patients who were on insulin were using the newer insulin analog preparations for both basal and bolus injections , while the remaining half were on the usual human nph and r insulin preparations . almost half of the patients on insulin were using pen devices ; the remaining half were using insulin via a syringe . based on the questionnaire given , approximately two-thirds of patients were still worried about starting insulin therapy . data on metabolic control : the mean hemoglobin a1c ( a1c ) in the 2008 study was 8.03 % which is slightly better than the same survey done in 2003 where the mean a1c was 8.9 % . only approximately 15 % of the patients in the study achieved the target a1c goal of < 7.0 % from the american diabetes association . blood glucose self-monitoring is considered a mainstay in the treatment of diabetes because it has been shown to assist in improving glycemic control . unfortunately , due to economic pressures and a basic lack of disease awareness , the majority of patients choose to buy t2d medication instead of paying for test strips . however , increased aware-ness of the disease and increased physician education regarding the benefits of home glucose monitoring may have improved the utilization of glucose monitoring over time . hence , compared with the earlier 2008 diabcare survey , there was considerable improvement in the number of patients who reported self-monitoring from 16.1 % in 2003to 46.5 % in 2008. this supports the role of diligent diabetes education among filipino patients with diabetes to optimize glucose control . metabolic control measures are an important component of comprehensive , complications- centric diabetes care . results of one study found that 94 % of patients in the philippines with t2d had dyslipidemia , but only 53 % of these patients . available diabetes medications in the philippines : class drug biguanides metformin sulfonylureas glibenclamide , glipizide , gliclazide , glimipride a-glucosidase inhibitor acarbose ddpivinhibitors sitagliptin , saxagliptin , vildagliptin , linagliptin glp1 receptor agonists liraglutide , exenatide , lixisenatide sglt2 inhibitors dapaglifozin , empagli ozin , canagli ozin pending insulins human insulin r , mix 70/30 , nph , glulisine , insulin aspart , detemir , glargine , degludec . diabetes care in the philippines received treatment with statins . along these lines , hypertension was found in 68 % of patients , but only 64 % were treated with antihypertensive medications , where angiotensin receptor blockers were the drugs most commonly used . the study authors concluded that the status of diabetes care in the philippines appears below the accepted standards and calls for urgent measures to improve the delivery of quality care among patients with t2d . among newly diagnosed patients with t2d in the philippines , 20 % already had peripheral neuropathy , 42 % had proteinuria , and 2 % had diabetic retinopathy upon consultation . this study sug- gests that diabetes awareness in the philippines is also far from ideal . diabetes programs diabetes awareness campaigns have always been at the forefront of activities among diabetes organization in the philippines , including the psedm , the institute for diabetes foundation ( idsf ) , diabetes philippines ( dp ) , american association of clinical endocrinologists philippines ( aacephilippines ) , and the philippine center for diabetes education foundation ( pcdef ) . diabetes aware-ness month is celebrated every july with concurrent activities nationwide , including many lay forum events . the department of health also reserves every fourth week of july in its yearly calendar for a diabetes awareness campaign . additionally , general practitioners and internal medicine specialists regularly attend diabetes workshops by these organizations to optimize care in underserved regions . availability and affordability of laboratory tests : most of the important laboratory tests including a1 care available in most tertiary hospitals in major cities of the philippines . however , standardization of this a1c as say according to the dcct ( diabetes control and complications trial ) or ngsp ( originally referred to as the national glycohemoglobin standardization program in 1996 ) certification can not be accurately established . it is for this reason that the uni ed cpg established by the unite for diabetes philippines ( made up of > 20 specialties ) state that a1c can not be used in the philippines to diagnose diabetes because of lack of standardization . the philippines cpg recommends that only fasting plasma glucose , random plasma glucose , and 2-hour glucose using oralglucose tolerance testing should be used as tests for diagnosing diabetes . however the cpgrecom- mends a1c measurement for glucose control monitoring . another problem with a1 cis that it is not readily available in public hospitals and health centers , further limiting the ability to monitor glycemic status and achieve optimal diabetes care . a major concern for the general public is the high cost of laboratory testing for comprehensive evaluation of patients with diabetes . a comprehensive panel including the complete blood count , a1c fasting blood sugar , blood urea nitrogen , creatinine , serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase , lipid pro le , urinalysis , and urine albumin/creatinine ratio will cost approximately $ 45 in a private hospital laboratory or outpatient diagnostic center . without out patient medical insurance , these and other laboratory costs are out-of-pocket expenses . for perspective , this cost is 3 to 4 times more than the average daily earning of a working filipino . as of 2010 , the aver-age daily pay for a domestic worker in the philippines is only p132.60 or roughly us $ 3 per day . in comparative wage studies of different countries , as of 2015 , the calculated average monthly wage of a filipino worker is only $ 174.67 to $ 242.60 . 35 poverty continues to be a major part of this challenge , affecting both the financial and socio economic fronts . the national poverty index of the philippines as of 2014 continues to be high and hovers around 25.8 % , with many of the poorest still in curring out-of-pocket expenses . therefore , the high cost of laboratory evaluation represents a clear disincentive for outpatient follow-up and another factor contributing to suboptimal care . family support on the bright side , a distinctive feature among filipinos is the strong family unit . parents are taken care of by family members up to the time of their death . having diabetes is not being discriminated by family members but instead receives very strong family support . elderly parents are always accompanied by family members to outpatient clinic visits . financial burden from medicines to laboratories are all shouldered and shared by siblings . single children are expected to continue help the household expenses until they are married . nursing homes are not in practice in the philippines and therefore chronic disease supportive measures , such as with diabetes and its complications , are provided by family members until the patients death . mankind knows diabetes mellitus since ages . indian medical history mentions madhumeha in charak samhita ( 500-700 bc ) and has given description of this disorder in detail . the following shlok describes symptoms of diabetes . charak mentions a madhumehi person passes large amount of sweet urine . in spite of knowing the disease for so long the reaction of the patient at the time of diagnosis remains almost the same . the moment of diagnosis brings a lot of unnecessary despair . it is frightening to the patient . but most of the times this reaction is due to misconception about the disease . india is going to be a country with largest diabetes population by year 2025. what is diabetes ? millions of people have diabetes . even children suffer from this disease . that is why i feel that you are fortunate that your disease has been diagnosed at right time . this is one of the most widely studied , researched and advance areas in the medical field . at present there is no cure in any of the pathies for this disease . but with modern medical advancement you can definitely live near normal healthy life . we are here to add life to your life . we care for you and for your diabetes . your cooperation is mandatory because a diabetic who knows the most about his disease faces least problems . in any disease it is said that half the battle is won by confidence and i intend to give you confidence in this booklet , confidence to live with the disease gracefully and confidence to tackle your problems intelligently . let us start with the basic question i.e . what is diabetes ? glucose is essential for providing energy for normal body functions . in diabetes the blood glucose levels are increased due to relative or absolute deficiency of insulin . insulin is a hormone . a hormone is a chemical secreted by one of the glands in our body . this gland is situated in abdomen and is known as pancreas . insulin acts as a gatekeeper that allows entry of glucose into the cell . if the amount of insulin is abnormal or the function of insulin is at fault excess of glucose accumulates in the body with harmful effects on the cells of various organs . diabetes is a metabolic disorder in which body is unable to handle glucose for its energy requirements . as we have already discussed , insulin is essential for entry of glucose in to the cell that is why : cells can not adequately utilise glucose , so body tries to produce more glucose ( gluconeogenesis ) . this is how blood glucose keeps on rising even if there is no food intake . there are two major types of diabetes . the first type i.e . insulin dependent diabetes . it can be treated only with insulin as the main drug . this is common in younger age group of patients . the second type is non-insulin dependent diabetes ( type ii ) . this is more common in india . this usually affects people above 40 years of age . this group can be managed with diet , exercises and oral medications . some patients in this group may require insulin sometime later in life . uncontrolled diabetes can lead to deleterious effects on every part of the body if not looked after well at the right time . even if one may not , in actual sense suffer the consequences of the disease today , it needs to be adequately treated . complacency and neglect is always dangerous . remember that the disease has to be well controlled as it is critical in leading a normal life . poorly controlled diabetes can be a major aggravating factor for later diabetes complications . following chart shows some of these complication risks . this is only to make you aware how important it is to control diabetes and not to scare you about this disease . let us understand how this disease starts making its impression on your life . usually , disease creeps in silently . one comes to know of it generally during routine blood sugar test for getting licenses , insurance etc . sometimes it is detected only during treatment of other concomitant illness or before surgery . following are the common manifestations of diabetes . report as a surprise , increased appetite and thirst , significant weightloss , infections in folds , increased urination , and exhaustion . who should test themselves for diabetes ? everybody with above mentioned symptoms . close relatives of diabetes patients . for type 1 diabetes hereditary factor is less prominent . if a father is diabetic then the risk to the child is 5-10 % . if a mother is diabetic then the risk is 5 % . type 2 or niddm has significant genetic predisposition . if one parent has diabetes the risk is 40 % . if both parents are diabetic the risk is 90 % . pregnant women diabetes is not uncommon due to various hormonal and metabolic changes during pregnancy . those having high blood pressure , obesity , heart disease and paralysis etc . a lady who delivered a baby weighing more than 4.5 kg . all above 45 years of age should check their sugar level once in a year . how is diabetes detected ? estimation and interpretation of blood glucose is the only test for diagnosis of diabetes . world health organization ( who ) has laid down guidelines for diagnosis . criteria for diagnosis of diabetes fasting venous plasma glucose > 140 mg/100ml and two hours after 75 gm ingestion of glucose > 200 mg /100ml recently , american diabetes association has accepted the fasting plasma glucose values as > 126mg/100ml for diagnosis of diabetes . how to prepare for blood test ? how one should prepare for the blood test is also very important . the person should have normal diet 3-4 days prior to the test . please do not try to reduce sugar intake purposely just to show less blood sugar values . by this , one is not only fooling the doctor but oneself also . actually you are delaying the diagnosis which may prove very costly later . we want to diagnose the disease so as to take correct measures to control it at the earliest time . you should remember that by checking sugar levels doctors are not making you a patient but trying to avoid serious complications related to high sugars . at the time of blood test the person should be fasting overnight . he can have water.the next morning fasting blood glucose sample is collected . two hours after 75g of glucose load or lunch second blood glucose sample is collected . another way is , to give post lunch plasma sample on one day and to give fasting glucose sample next morning . a known diabetic patient is supposed to follow the normal daily routine on the day of blood test also . that means the timings of breakfast , medicines and the lunch should be followed on this day as usual . the doctor can do any modification in the drug and the doses if the patient follows a regular schedule on the blood test day . diabetes management for each person is different . do not compare your doses and drugs with other patients . management of diabetes is not only sugar control but much more beyond that . your doctor knows your system very well . he will decide what is best for you . feel free to ask all your queries to your doctor . controlling diabetes . what is the idea of control in diabetes ? basic idea of control is that the person should get relief from the symptoms also , blood biochemistry must be in an acceptable range so as to avoid acute and long-term complications due to uncontrolled disease . it is important to know the fact that though the blood biochemistry prescribes normal range of values , they may be little more or less without causing any alarm signals . hence one should be aware of the concept of acceptable controls . the management will depend upon overall health of the patient and certainly not on blood reports ! regular medical examination includes : monthly weight record , blood pressure check up , blood glucose testing , complete lipid profile , urine and blood tests for assessing kidney functions , tests for evaluation of heart disease , examination of eyes , evaluation of diabetic foot changes , and any sexual problems . other specialized tests can be suggested depending upon results of tests mentioned above and the clinical examination by the specialist . diabetes care schedule : every 3-6 months : regular visits to your doctor , it includes - test for plasma glucose levels , glycated hemoglobin test ( such as hba1c ) , examination of injection site , feet : examined without shoes and socks . every year : cholesterol : fasting profile including hdl & ldl cholesterol and triglycerides , kidneys : microalbumin measured , eyes : examined through dilated pupils . every 2-3 years : hdl/cholesterol : if the last reading was normal , number of visits to the doctor depend on the control of blood sugar . myths about diabetes to help separate fact from fiction , here are some of the myths and the actual truth about diabetes . all diabetes is inherited : not everyone who gets diabetes inherits it . people tend to inherit the risk of niddm diabetes more than iddm . you are considered at risk for developing niddm if any first-degree relatives have diabetes . people with diabetes should never eat sugar and sweets : sugar and sweets do raise your blood glucose , but people with diabetes can safely eat sugar as part of their meal plan in their recommended quota of calories occasionally . and just to clear up another myth , you can ’ t get diabetes from eating too much sugar if you don ’ t carry any other risk factor for its development . you can have borderline diabetes for many years : there is no such thing as borderline diabetes . you either have it , or you don ’ t . you have diabetes if , your fasting blood glucose levels are greater than 126 mg/dl , or the random blood glucose is above 200 mg/dl on at least two occasions . once you start taking pills or insulin , you can eat anything that you want : the pills or insulin that you take for diabetes are more effective when they don ’ t have to work as hard to lower your blood glucose . combining your medicines with a healthy meal plan and physical activity is the best method of control of diabetes . insulin causes impotence : some men who have diabetes may become impotent , but not because they take insulin . impotence or erectile dysfunction is caused by damage to nerves caused by longstanding high blood glucose . diabetes is one of the many reasons for getting impotence.the best way to judge your blood sugar level is by the way that you feel : some people have symptoms when their blood glucose is too high or low , others do not . because some of the symptoms of high and low blood glucose are similar , it can be hard to know what your symptoms mean . the only way to be sure is to check your blood glucose . if my blood sugar is usually over 180 mg/dl that must be normal for me : no . your usual blood glucose isn ’ t the same as normal blood glucose . just because your blood glucose is usually high , does not mean that this is an acceptable blood glucose level . high blood glucose levels that are above those recommended goals do damage to many organs and systems in your body . the doctor has prescribed me insulin . however i do not feel sick at all . so i would better postpone taking insulin at a later date : for some people with type 2 diabetes , especially those who are obese , moderate weight loss and increased physical activity can lower blood glucose levels so significantly , that insulin injections are not necessary . but bargaining like this is bad for your health ! when you put off insulin even for a few months , high blood glucose levels can be doing a lot of damage . instead , start insulin as soon as it is recommended so that you can keep your blood glucose in control . at the same time you can focus on losing weight and exercising more , with the hope that this will help to reduce your body ’ s need for insulin injections in the future . “ my diabetes is much more serious than some people because i have to take insulin injection while others do not take it ” . many people avoid insulin because they believe it is a good way to keep their diabetes from becoming too “ serious. ” when you really think about it , that seems silly , doesn ’ t it ? if your blood glucose levels are high , whether you are taking insulin or not , the problem is serious and needs to be addressed . if you avoid insulin it doesn ’ t make the high blood glucose less serious , it just makes it easier for you to ignore the problem . certainly when you begin taking insulin , your diabetes does not suddenly become more serious . rather , you are now using a new and powerful tool to address a problem that has been serious all along . it would be a beginning towards a better life . type 2 or niddm diabetes is not serious : this is never true . all types of diabetes are serious , and need to be taken seriously by people who have it and their families . “ the first prescription of insulin is the prescription for rest of your life ” : it is true that most people who take insulin continue to do so for the rest of their lives . but does it really matter ? taking insulin injection is certainly not like an addiction to drugs or narcotics . you are always in control of what you are doing and it is for running your body system correctly . some people do manage to make the necessary lifestyle changes so that insulin can be safely discontinued without a rise in blood glucose levels . there is definitely no point in avoiding one or two pricks of injection at the cost of your life . now you have some idea about your disease . the golden rule of diabetes care is that “ you are the most important person even more that the doctor in management of diabetes ” . management of diabetes can best be described under following steps . diet , exercise , oral medication , and insulin injection . diet in diabetes . this means that many diseases and symptoms are managed by proper diet . even hundreds of medicines may not work or show effect unless certain rules regarding diet are adhered to . this is the most important area in the management of the disease . you have lots of people other than the doctor in your periphery to prescribe your diet . but remember that you are going to decide your diet in consultation with your doctor and the dietician . you may be bothered with lots of “ don ’ ts ” . but you will realize that you can eat practically everything provided you know what you are eating and how much you are eating . traditional indian diet with little modification is “ ideal diabetic diet ” . diabetic diet does not deprive you of many foodstuffs . you do not have to make major changes in your food habits in particular and life style in general other than avoid sugars ( mainly sweets ) and quantity of fat in your daily diet . you need to be just little more disciplined in limiting your food intakes . you can eat everything in your allotted quota of calories in consultation with your doctor and dietician . you can eat rice , potatoes , fruits etc . as other people . one fruit per day can be eaten without any problems . you just need to get carbohydrates , proteins , fats and vitamins in right proportion . remember that strict but unsupervised diet control can also be more harmful.depending on your ideal body weight and calorie requirement diet can be tailor-made for you . the design of the plan can easily be made by keeping in mind your likes and dislikes . you can have variety of food in “ exchange food plan ” . your doctor and dietician can be consulted for this innovation . diet control does not mean weight reduction . some diabetics need to gain weight . this can be done under your doctor ’ s guidance . remember do not add too much oil as cooking medium . do not add sugar or jaggery in vegetable preparations . have in ample amount whenever you feel hungry . salads : cucumber , cabbage , lettuce , onion , tomato , capsicum , and radish . plain lemon juice with water . clear soups ( without additives like starch or bread pieces ) . thin buttermilk without cream or sugar . sprouted cereals . what you should avoid ? jams , jellies , soft drinks . sugar , jaggery , honey . oily foodstuff . fried food . alcohol and other beverages . concentrated sweets . fasting for any reason . yellow part of egg . liver , kidney and brain parts in non-vegetarian food . prawns . what you should restrict ? oil consumption . salt . why salt should be restricted ? diabetics are more prone to get high blood pressure and heart diseases . since these disorders are also related to the dietary conditions , you will have to strike a correct balance of different components of food . you can make food palatable with reduced salt by adding tamarind , garlic , fresh lime , onion , dry mango powder ( aamchur ) etc . vegetable exchange ( 40 calories ) cabbage , cucumber , cauliflower , brinjol , tomato , lady ’ s finger , beans , padwal , drumsticks , pumpkin , methi , radish . ( 1/2 - 3/4 vati cooked ) carrot , beet root , green peas , suran , potato . non vegeterian food ( 70 calories of 30 gms of each of the followings ) beef , lamb , pork , fish . chicken . ( avoid yellow part of egg , liver , kidney and brain parts , and prawns ) . dairy products ( 40 cal ) . milk ( from cow ) - 50ml . skimmed milk - 1 cup . curd - 1/2 vati . cheese - one cube small sized . paneer - 1 piece . fruits ( 50 cal ) banana 1/2 anjir . papaya 1/2 vati ( medium ) . peru ( guava ) . 1 orange . 1 pineapple . 1/2 vati . custard apple 1/2 dates 2-3 grapes 1 0 - 1 2 ( sitafal ) ( khajur ) . apple 1/2 peach 1 coconut 1/2 cup . water mango pieces 2 water 3/2 cup . it is obvious from these lists that you can enjoy wide variety of foods . your diet should not be monotonous . you are also entitled to delicious and varied food as other healthy individuals . artificial sweetner these are synthetically prepared agents . they are 200 to 300 times sweeter than sugar . these can be safely used in tea , coffee and even in preparing sweets . exercise is a medicine and fun too ! importance of exercise in the management of diabetes is given prominence in charak samhita in following shlok . this means that a lazy , obese person and a person who eats lots of fat is attacked by death very easily . exercise is an important aspect of diabetes management . how exactly does exercise help in diabetes control . it improves glucose control by peripheral utilization of glucose by tissues . it improves blood circulation , tones up your heart , lungs and other muscles , it helps you to keep healthy , it is fun and enjoyable , it helps to reduce weight , it increases physical stamina . a diabetic person without any associated complication can do any type of exercise . start the exercise programme with minimum time and intensity . then try to achieve the maximum within your limits . exercise should be done regularly for at least for 30-35 minutes per day & atleast 5 days a week . try to do the same exercise every day . no frequent exchange programme should be tried here . the exercise should not be changed in its intensity either as that will create problems . keep some sugar handy , to take care of hypoglycemia if it occurs . wear loose cotton clothes . do not exercise bare footed . brisk walk , jogging , cycling are good exercises . before starting the exercise programme discuss with your doctor for any special instructions . for many diabetics who have associated problems of foot or osteoarthritis walking may be difficult . they can consult the doctor for upper limb exercises or exercises in lying down position where weight bearing can be avoided . yogic exercises are also helpful . medication : in some patients diet control and exercises are not adequate for achieving acceptable blood glucose levels . these patients require medication either in the form of oral drugs or insulin injections . diet and exercise need to be continued as a part of treatment of diabetes . basically , oral medication is of following major types : sulfonylurea ( available commercially as daonil , glynase , euglucon and dimicron ) and biguinides ( marketed as glyciphase , walaphase ) . these have different modes of action . the doctor will decide the suitable type and dose of medicine . you may need one or more tablets if the control of your blood glucose is not possible by following a healthy eating plan or by being active . these tablets lower blood glucose , in different ways . for example , sulfonylurea lowers blood glucose by helping the pancreas make more insulin . sulfonylureas have to be taken half an hour before food . whereas , biguanides reduce blood glucose by decreasing the liver ’ s production of glucose . it also causes the muscle to use glucose more efficiently . the two other new types of medicines like acarbose and insulin sensitizers work in other ways . acarbose reduces absorption of glucose from intestine . it has to be taken just before first bite of lunch and dinner . these medicines have specific indications . it is again important to remind you at this stage that no two patients are similar . hence do not compare your doses or type of tablet with other patients . do not take tablets prescribed to some other patient when you run out of stock or while away from home . always carry sufficient quantity of your medicine with you . these tablets should be avoided in pregnancy , diabetes associated with severe heart diseases , kidney and liver diseases or young diabetics . after years of use sometimes oral medicine may not show required effects on blood sugar . this is called primary or secondary drug the patient may not respond to tablets then . this is because the oral drugs can work if the pancreas make enough to let the pills work . the pills do not stop working , the pancreas does . if the pancreas no longer make insulin then one must take insulin injection . remember what is most important is to control of blood sugar levels . eating healthy and staying active is still a must even if you are taking medicine . consider your oral drugs as “ extra help ” to control your blood glucose . more than likely you need to shed a few kilograms , improve your blood fats and blood pressure . healthy eating and exercise helps you achieve these goals as well . and if you lose enough weight you maybe able to take less tablets or no tablets at all . remember that it may only take a few kilos off your body to get rid of diabetes ! insulin-injection : insulin therapy there are misconceptions and phobia in minds of patients and sometimes even doctors about insulin . prescription of insulin does not mean that your disease is severe . any type of diabetes mellitus is a major illness . it needs to be treated with whatever possible means . the fear of insulin is due to its mode of delivery which is through injection . but with newer types of injection syringes and with right technique one can have minimum pain while taking the injection . insulin is needed by young diabetics , very high blood sugar levels , pregnant diabetic women , diabetics who have to undergo operative procedures and/or other serious illness , diabetics with associated complications like heart or kidney disease may require insulin in addition to oral tablets , infections like tuberculosis or hepatitis in presence of diabetes . never refuse to take insulin if your doctor advises . there are definitely more advantages of being on insulin therapy in certain situations . you have to take insulin in the form of an injection not because of the seriousness of the problem , but because it is the only mode by which insulin can be administered at the moment . types of insulin : two main types of insulin are available . the first type is fast acting . the action starts within 1/2 to 1 hour after taking it . hence it is taken 1/2 to 1 hour before consuming food . the second type is cloudy type of insulin . it is an intermediate acting insulin . the action starts 3-4 hours after injection and lasts for 18-20 hours . peak effect is seenafter 10-12 hours . both these insulins are available in premixed forms as well in different ratios to make it most convenient for the patient . insulin preservation : storage of insulin is very important for its optimum action . insulin should be stored preferably in fridge ( on the door at the bottom level ) . it should not be frozen . it should not be exposed to extreme temperatures like shelf near the cooking stove in the kitchen or geyser in the bathroom . constant sunlight at the windows can cause problem if the bottle of insulin has been left there . insulin can be kept safety for 15 - 30 days at room temperature in relatively cooler place also . how to prepare insulin shot ? wash your hands thoroughly . roll the insulin vial in both hands . do not shake it . take cloudy insulin or intermediate acting insulin vial . clean the top with a spirit swab . insert the needle in the vial and push air inside the vial , in an amount equal to units of insulin you are required to take . take out empty syringe without any insulin in it . now take vial of clear or rapid acting insulin . push air inside the vial , amount equal to units of your insulin dose . make vial-syringe unit upside down . just pull back the plunger to withdraw clear insulin . take out the needle . now insert needle in cloudy insulin vial . pull the piston back so that insulin flows inside the syringe without getting mixed inside the vial . remove air bubbles by firmly flicking the syringe . you are now ready with insulin shot . clean the area where you want to inject . pinch the skin fold . hold syringe like a pen with thumb and middle finger . press the plunger with index finger , straight in the skinfold . you have now injected successfully . injection device : insulin syringes are available in markets that are disposable and capable of offering near “ painfree ” injections . insulin portable pens , insulin jets and portable insulin pumps are also available . the pen like instruments are available now in the market which allow you to dial the dose and inject . these pens have following advantages : they assure a freedom from syringes , they are very accurate , and they increase the self-confidence of the patients and assure them a near normal social life . sites for insulin injection insulin injection is easy to take . hypoglycemia : hypoglycemia means sudden lowering of blood sugar . when you are on medication for diabetes , lowering of the blood sugar level is the normal expected response of the drug . this is not a side effect of the medicine but sometimes , for the reasons given below , this level of blood glucose is lowered significantly . how to recognise hypoglycemia ? following symptoms can be correlated with hypoglycemia . sudden feeling of hunger and cramps in stomach , unexplained uneasiness , sweating , headache , blurring of vision , tremulousness , palpitation , abnormal behaviour , sudden mood changes . if it is not treated at proper time it may progress to deterioration in consciousness , convulsions , paralysis and coma . all these symptoms of hypoglycemia are avoidable if it is treated immediately . causes of hypoglycemia : missed food , excess of diabetes medicine dose , sudden unaccustomed exercise , alcohol consumption . treatment of hypoglycemia : as soon as you get warning symptoms take sugar , fruit juice , chocolates or some sweets immediately . if it is left untreated patient may require injection of glucose or glucagon . report this event to the doctor so as to adjust doses of medicine . a glucometer is very handy to keep a record of glucose levels . it would help to monitor the hypoglycemic conditions as well . sick day plan : simple illnesses like viral fever , diarrhea , flu etc are as common in diabetics as in non-diabetic persons . when you are sick body releases hormones that help to fight against disease . but these hormones may raise blood glucose levels . if you are not having enough insulin to take care of this situation , body will release lot of ketone bodies . this can be very harmful.check your blood glucose and urine ketose more often when you are sick . do not skip total insulin dose or medicine even if you are not eating properly . do not exercise on a sick day . if the urine sugars are absent and ketone bodies are present , it ndicates starvation ketoses . you need to eat more and take more fluids in this situation . pregnancy and diabetes : all those related to the field of diabetology , as patient or as a health care professional should thank best and banting ( 1921 ) for their discovery of insulin . it was next to impossible for a pregnant diabetic woman to survive before availability of insulin . but now the scenario has totally changed . with medical advancement a diabetic lady can have a normal pregnancy and expect a normal child . its also possible for a nondiabetic pregnant woman to get diabetes during the course of her pregnancy . this entity is called as gestational diabetes and is not an uncommon occurrence . what is gestational diabetes mellitus ( gdm ) ? appearance of diabetes during the course of pregnancy is called as gdm . this condition is generally asymptotic . but it is a very serious condition if left untreated . uncontrolled diabetes is a major health hazard for both the mother and the baby in the womb . the good news is that if it is well managed , than the course of pregnancy and outcome is almost same as non-diabetic pregnancies . current recommendations are that all pregnant women must be screened for gestational diabetes between the 24th and 28th weeks of pregnancy . some important tips : if your diabetes is detected during pregnancy report to a diabetologist or an obstetrician immediately . diet control and exercises are initial steps in the management like other diabetic patients , but oral hypoglycemic tablets are not recommended during pregnancy . the oral drugs should be immediately stopped as soon as pregnancy is confirmed and patient should be switched over to insulin . temperatures like shelf near the cooking stove in the kitchen or geyser in the bathroom . constant sunlight at the windows can cause problem if the bottle of insulin has been left there . insulin can be kept safety for 15 - 30 days at room temperature in relatively cooler place also . if you are a known diabetic and planning to conceive keep your blood glucose as tightly controlled as possible . the diabetic woman in child bearing age group must plan family with doctor ’ s consultation with excellent blood glucose control throughout . some problems in the fetus and mothers are more common in diabetic pregnancies but if the sugar control is well , a normal pregnancy and delivery is possible . diabetes per se does not pose contraindication for child bearing . insulin and only insulin remains as a major treatment till delivery . the best insulin is human insulin . try to maintain fasting blood glucose levels between 70 to 90 mg/ dl and post prandial 100-135 mg/dl . through out preconception period and during pregnancy . you may have to do some special blood tests and frequent sonographic examinations during pregnancy for evaluation of normal foetal growth . diabetic ladies should avoid oral contraceptive tablets and use other barrier methods for contraception . diabetes and youth : no age is barred from getting attacked by diabetes , but diabetes at young age is a special condition . there are many physical , endocrinal and psychological changes taking place in young diabetic patients . their activities and food requirements are higher than adult patients . this type of diabetes needs only insulin for managemnet . the adolescent changes in the minds need to be understood by the parents and other family members . the managemnet becomes easier if the parents and the child have good rapport . counseling and psychiatric help is sometimes essential at this stage for better compliance . children should be given enough freedom regarding diet and activities but still be supervised . occupation , job , marriage and post-marriage events do not pose any problem in a well-controlled young diabetic patient . horizon is as open for these young people as it is for non-diabetic ones . self monitoring : self-monitoring means that the patient can monitor and maintain test results of urine and blood sugar examinations at home . it ’ s a novel concept so that you have maximum information about your health situation . urine can be examined for presence of sugars , proteins and ketones . sugar in urine does not carry much significance and blood sugar examination is the only confirmatory test . but it is better than doing nothing . commercially available urine strips are quite reliable and give useful information to the doctor . ketone body testing is most important in urine test . they are present in urine when dm control is very poor and body is under severe metabolic stress . it is an emergency situation . home blood glucose monitoring is an important examination that can be carried out by patient himself . small pocket size glucometers are available commercially . they give instant blood glucose results . a person can check blood glucose at different times in a day and as and when required in the case of hypoglycemia . your visits to pathology laboratory are reduced . you know your blood glucose levels over a long period that helps in maintaining normoglycemia . blood test done in laboratory by venous route have slightly different values than those checked by glucometer . having glucometer for insulin requiring patient is the top priority in the purchase list of your household gadgets . long term complications of diabetes and management : diabetic complications are medical problems that occur more often in people with diabetes than those without diabetes . uncontrolled diabetes over a long period of time causes changes in practically every organ in the body . if proper precaution is taken at the right time , most of these complications are avoidable or can at least be postponed . high blood sugar levels for long period cause changes in the blood vessels and nerves . this leads to involvement of target organs . the lining of blood vessels gets thicker and the lumen is reduced . as a result blood flow to the affected organ is reduced . thus the heart , brain , kidney etc . can get affected if the related vessels are involved . regular follow-up with the doctor , meticulous sugar control and following the advice does help in the management of these complications . the major organs affected by diabetes are eyes , heart , kidney , foot . eyes : early cataractus changes and changes in blood vessels of eyes are very common . it is a usual cause of blindness in diabetes and it is avoidable to some extent . visit the specialist once a year for eye examination even if you do not have any eye problem ( it your diabetes is more than five years old ) . remember that correction for spectacle number by an optician is not enough . heart and brain : if the disease is not controlled heart and brain blood vessels of diabetics are affected at earlier stage than non-diabetic people . diabetics may not experience typical “ filmy type chest ” pain of heart attack . most of the times they may only feel some discomfort . silent infarct or painless heart attacks do occur in diabetic patients due to involvement of nerves and blood vessels . unexplained sweating , discomfort in left arm and neck can be an indication of heart attack . some important tips are strictly follow the advice of the doctor . do not postpone the specialized tests like the treadmill test , recommended by the doctor just because you may not suffer at that moment . most of the heart attacks and paralysis can be averted or atleast postponed if medication is started in time . be particular about your diet , fat intake and exercises . these have definitive roles in prevention of heart diseases . kidney : kidney failures and problems are very commonly seen in uncontrolled diabetes . high blood pressure is a common occurrence in diabetic patients . regular examination of blood pressure and urine should be done to avoid this complication . examination of urinary proteins and microalbumin is essential to initiate early treatment and retard kidney damage . do not wait for warning symptoms of high blood pressure to occur . foot : foot in diabetes is at risk . there are three major problems . poor blood circulation . reduced sensation due to involvement of nerves . susceptibility to infections . the pain , which is a protective reflex , may be absent in some patients due to involvement of nerves . in such cases the injury may go unnoticed . this can lead to foot ulcer and infections . due to poor blood circulation the healing process is very slow . each year more than 50,000 people with diabetes lose a limb or a part of a limb due to diabetic complication . this can be upsetting news to the patient but most of these problems are because of unawareness and negligence of both the patient and the doctor . some foot care tips . wear proper sized footware . inspect your feet daily for blister , injury . discoloration on foot . wash and scrub the foot gently . moisten with cream after proper drying . in-toe space for infection . pressure points due to footwear . cracks over heels . never walk barefooted indoor or outdoor . wear cotton socks . cut nails straight across . remember : footwear shopping should be done preferably late in the afternoon when foot is slightly bigger in size than in the morning hours . inspect your shoes from inside before wearing and remove any foreign materials like small stones or sand . do not buy footwear unless they are 100 % comfortable . report to the doctor about foot injury if it does not heal in 2-3 days . nerves : long years of uncontrolled diabetes in some patients can lead to involvement of nerves . burning in feet and cramps in legs are very common . they can have tingling sensation over feet , sole and fingers . this is described as glove and stocking type of neuropathy . this is very important as sensations at these points may be decreased and injury may go unnoticed . these painless injuries may lead to diabetic foot complications . sexual dysfunction long standing uncontrolled dm is one of the reasons for impotence . complete physical and psychological evaluation is necessary . advanced medical care offers good results in the management of sexual dysfunction . psychological factors and diabetes : diagnosis of diabetes in the very first stage can cause lot of stress to the patient . some patients feel victimized . they may have “ why me “ feeling . there is no cure to this disease . person has to live with it . but most of these above-mentioned negative reactions are due to misconceptions about diabetes . there is a lot of unawareness about it . counseling to the patient at this stage helps to alter his attitude towards the disease . this in turn results in better acceptance and compliance . involvement of family members in diabetes care is very important . person may feel deprived of food due to many restrictions on diet . tailor-made diet that will take into account person ’ s likes and dislikes can be offered with the help of a dietician . sexual dysfunction can be a major factor of worry . help of andrologists , gynaecologists and psychologists can reorient life in a proper direction . other psychological stress factors like office work , household problems , financial difficulties can ultimately lead to a rise in the blood glucose level . the health care personnel should extend his support to cope up such situations . regular aerobics , yogic exercises and meditation plays an important role in stress management . short vacation from routine life can be of great help as a stress reliever . can diabetes be prevented ? it is a million-dollar question . it is theoretically possible but practically very difficult . this is because it does not have one specific reason which one can take care of preventive steps can be taken at different stages . primary prevention : this means the prevention of diabetes mellitus to occur at first step . genetic counseling can help at this step . marriage between two diabetic persons is not advisable as stronger family history makes offspring more prone to get diabetes . ideally , marriage between two genetic prediabetic should be avoided . gene therapy and specific protection against the disease are the challenges of new millenium . person having strong family history of diabetes can definitely take some precautions . healthy food habits and a physically active life can keep the disease away . risk factors like obesity , smoking and tobacco chewing are definitely modifiable . what you need is more of self-control and self-confidence . you should always be telling yourself “ it is not difficult , i can do it ” . secondary prevention : earliest diagnosis of the disease and proper management is required to avoid the long-term complications . this can be achieved by maintaining blood glucose levels as normal as possible . various tests for screening of target organs are easily available . complete medical check up and tests like microalbumin excretion , treadmill test , and fundoscopy are helpful in detecting the earliest involvement of organs . medical intervention at right time and initiation of medication definitely can postpone or retard the development of complications . tertiary prevention : at tertiary level of prevention , measures can be taken to retard the progress of complications , which have already occurred . target organ involvement like heart disease , kidney problem is managed successfully . newer techniques in cardiology , advances in the field of dialysis and renal replacement therapy have brightened the life of diabetics . modern medical practice has really offered not only longevity but also better quality of life to diabetic people . epilogue : now you should be convinced that diabetes is not the dreaded disease as it was thought to be decades before . your positive attitude towards the disease is very important . what we require is little modification in your life style to make it more organized and disciplined ! availability of artificial sweeteners allows you to enjoy delicious food preparations . newer injection devices and purer forms of insulin have made life of diabetics more comfortable . advancement in pancreatic transplants , gene therapy definitely offers brighter future to the diabetic population . better understanding about the disease and its management will help you to lead healthy , complication free life . how does someone get diabetes ? you develop diabetes when your body can ’ t use glucose ( sugar ) properly . instead of burning up the sugar through your everyday activities , the average amount of sugar in your blood rises . what are the complications of diabetes ? if this abnormally high sugar level is not treated it can harm different parts of the body . the complications diabetes can cause include damage to : the eyes ; kidneys ; heart ; blood vessels ; and nerves . if diabetes is detected early , it can be treated and the risk of developing serious problem scan be greatly reduced . how many people in ireland have diabetes ? it is estimated that 200,000 people in the republic of ireland have diabetes . this number is expected to increase because our population is growing and ageing , and obesity rates are rising . if you are older and overweight , you are at increased risk of developing type diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a condition that makes it difficult for the body to use the glucose ( sugar ) in the blood . the body normally produces a hormone called insulin . insulin is produced by the pancreas . the pancreas is an organ found in the tummy area quite close to the stomach . insulin allows the glucose in our food to be taken from the blood and used by the body for energy . people with diabetes either don ’ t have enough insulin or the insulin that their pancreas produces does not work effectively . this means the body can not move the glucose out of the blood , so the sugar levels in the blood remain high . this extra glucose in the blood causes significant problems for the body 's functions . what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? you may be diagnosed after you go to your gp ( family doctor ) because : you feel tired or ill ; you have been losing weight ; you have an infection that is slow to clear up ; you are always thirsty the increased glucose in your blood brings more water through the kidneys to be passed as urine causing thirst and dehydration ; your vision is blurred extra glucose can be absorbed into the eye and cause blurred vision . what are the different types of diabetes ? there are a few different types of diabetes . the most common type 2 diabetes mellitus and type 1 diabetes mellitus . approximately 9 out of 10 people with diabetes will have type 2. women can sometimes get diabetes when they are pregnant . this is called gestational diabetes because it usually only lasts during the pregnancy . what is type 1 diabetes mellitus ? when someone has type 1 diabetes : their pancreas has stopped producing insulin . the exact cause of this condition is still unknown . it usually occurs in people under 35years of age , but there are exceptions to this . what is type 2 diabetes mellitus ? when someone has type 2 diabetes , the pancreas still produces some insulin , but : the pancreas is not producing enough insulin to meet the body ’ s needs ; or the insulin that is produced is not working very well . older people are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes , but there are exceptions to this . how is type 1 diabetes treated ? people with this type of diabetes need to inject insulin use an insulin pump . how is type 2 diabetes treated ? there are various ways to treat type 2 diabetes . the choice depends on many factors and 6differs between individuals . treatment may include any of the following combinations : diet and exercise ; diet , exercise and tablets ; diet , exercise , tablets and insulin ; diet , exercise and insulin . how is gestational diabetes treated ? in gestational diabetes , the extra demands of pregnancy mean that the mother does not have enough insulin to meet her body ’ s needs . this type of diabetes is first treated by controlling the quantity and type of the mothers food and drink . if this is not enough to treat the condition , the mother may begiven extra insulin as an injection . it is vital for the baby ’ s health that the mother does not have high blood sugar levels because the extra sugar supplies can cause the baby to grow too big . is a hypo the same as low blood sugar ? hypoglycaemia or a hypo is when the glucose level in the blood ( blood sugar level ) drops below the normal range . below normal is when it is less than 4mmol/l ( mg/dl ) . some tablets and insulin can cause a hypo especially if : meals are delayed ; or they are taken after unusually strenuous physical activity . what are the hypo warning signs ? if you have a hypo you may feel symptoms such as : sweating ; shaking ; dizziness ; and blurred vision . what should i do if i think i ’ m getting a hypo ? if you feel your blood sugar going low , you should treat it as soon as possible . never delay treatment of a low sugar level . hypo can be corrected by taking something sweet to drink or eat , such as ( for an adult ) : 100mls of lucozade ; or three glucose sweets . if you will not be eating a proper meal within the next hour , you should eat some carbohydrate ( starchy ) food like cereal bar or sandwich or follow the instructions that your diabetes team gives you . this will make sure that your blood sugar does not go low again . always tell your doctor or diabetes nurse about any hypos , unless you know why it happened , so that they can decide if your medication needs to be altered . how can i prevent hypos ? try not to miss a meal . try to eat carbohydrate at every meal ( for example , pasta , bread or rice ) . if you exercise , eat a snack and test your glucose levels every few hours a hypo can occur even a significant time after exercising . always carry some form of sugar with you such as glucose sweets or drinks , such as lucozade , in case you experience a hypo . it is very important to carry identification that shows you have diabetes , such as an identification bracelet , which you can buy on what are high blood sugar levels ? hyperglycaemia or high blood sugar levels are when the blood glucose level is above the target set for you . in the short term , high blood sugars will leave you feeling unwell and tired . if you have high blood sugars for a long time , it can lead to : eye disease ; heart problems ; and foot ulcers . diabetes is also associated with high blood pressure . if your blood glucose levels are constantly high , you should contact your doctor . what causes high blood sugar levels ? people with diabetes may have high blood glucose levels because : they have not taken their insulin ; they have an infection or illness ; or they have eaten too much food . even if you can not eat , illness can cause your blood sugar level to rise . will i need more insulin if i am ill ? if you are ill , you should check your blood glucose levels more frequently and never forget to take your insulin . you may need to increase your insulin during illness . if your blood glucose level is higher that 15 mmols ( 270 mg/dl ) , for more than one hour , check your blood or urine for ketones . if ketones are present you should follow your diabetes team instructions or contact them . measuring blood sugar levels why do i need to measure the sugar level in my blood ? the best way to monitor your diabetes is by measuring your blood sugar levels . you do this with a finger-prick blood test . if you find it difficult to do finger-prick blood tests , urine tests are another way of testing sugar levels . however , urine tests are not as accurate , but they are appropriate and adequate for some people . what is my ideal blood sugar level ? target blood sugar levels vary from person to person and you should ask your diabetes team to set a personal target for you . but generally the ideal target blood sugar levels should be : less than 10 mmol/l ( 180 mg/dl ) ; or less than 8 mmol/s ( 145 mg/dl ) in younger people . ask your doctor or nurse what your targets are . what are my target blood sugar levels ? fasting before meals after eating when should i do my blood tests ? you should test your blood sugar level : when you wake in the morning ; and before meals . your tests will tell you how well diet , medication and exercise are working together to control your diabetes . they also provide useful information for your doctor . how often should i do my blood tests ? generally you should measure your glucose levels between one and four times a day . your doctor or nurse will have the best advice on how often you need to test . during illness or if you change your lifestyle , you will need to test more often . what type of diet should i eat ? the ideal diet for people with diabetes is very much like the ideal diet for everybody else . a healthy diet is an essential part of treatment for people with diabetes and therefore needs to be followed for life . healthy diets are : low in refined sugar ; low in saturated fat ; high in fibre , vitamins and minerals . if you are overweight it is essential that you lose weight by changing your diet and exercising . this helps to improve your diabetes control because the insulin you produce works better and there are less demands on your body . anyone diagnosed with diabetes should be given an appointment with a dietician to help them with their diet . are there any tips for healthy eating ? eat regular meals eat regular meals every day , especially breakfast . check with your diabetes team if your insulin regime means you need to take a snack before going to bed at night . eat starchy foods as the main part of each meal , eat a starchy food like one of the following : bread ; cereal ; potato ; pasta ; or rice . try to eat the same amount of starchy foods at your meals each day . choose high fiber foods like : weetabix ; porridge ; bran flakes ; whole meal breads ; wholegrain rice ; or pastas . don ’ t take in too much sugar limit the intake of sugar and sugary foods . when you do take them as a treat , eat them with your meal . use an artificial sweetener instead of sugar in hot drinks . it is best to avoid or take in moderation the following foods : sugar ; chocolate and sweets ; honey and glucose ; regular jams and marmalades ; cakes and sweet biscuits ; and regular squash and sugary fizzy drinks . keep your fat intake low choose lean cuts of meat , remove visible fat and use low-fat methods of cooking like : oven baking , stewing , roasting , grilling , boiling , poaching , steaming or microwaving . choose low-fat dairy products . use low-fat spread instead of butter or margarine . limit the amount of spread used . use low-fat milk instead of regular milk . eat oily fish eat oily fish at least twice a week . include fish like : mackerel ; salmon ; sardines ; trout ; fresh or frozen tuna ; and herrings . eat vegetables and fruit eat plenty of vegetables and fruit . aim to have at least five portions each day spread out over the day . reduce your salt you should not add salt to your food at the table and you should reduce your intake of salty foods like : processed meats ; packet sauces ; gravies ; smoked fish ; crisps ; and nuts . diabetic foods are not useful you are not advised or recommended to buy special diabetic foods like sweets , chocolate and biscuits . this is because these foods are high in fat and therefore high in calories . should i worry about my cholesterol level ? it is important to control your cholesterol level . high cholesterol level may speed up the hardening of the arteries and increase your risk of heart attack . healthy low-fat diet with plenty of high-fibre starch helps to control your cholesterol level . according to european guidelines : people with diabetes should aim for cholesterol level of below4.5 mmol/l . however , this varies from person to person . ask your doctor to set a personal cholesterol target for you . your doctor may prescribe some medication to help control your cholesterol level . what about sport and exercise ? exercise is important to help you manage your diabetes . exercise helps you to : lose weight ; lower your blood pressure ; reduce your blood sugar levels ; and allow your insulin and tablets to work more effectively . it is always useful to increase your level of movement . always check with your doctor or nurse before starting a new exercise routine . you can ask your diabetes team to help you to develop an exercise plan . should i reduce my alcohol intake ? alcoholic drinks contain a lot of calories almost as many as fats and very few or no nutrients . you must be careful about how much you drink . you do n't have to give it up , but remember that alcohol : lowers your blood sugar ; and hides the signs of hypoglycemia ( low blood sugar ) . it is recommended that : women have fewer than two standard drinks of alcohol a day ; and men have fewer than three standard drinks of alcohol a day . it is recommended to have two or three alcohol-free days each week . standard drink is a regular pub measure . how often should i have my eyes tested ? when you have diabetes you should have your eyes checked every year by the doctor -including a full examination of the back of the eye . this is different to a vision test for glasses . what types of medication will need ? people with type diabetes will need to take regular injections of insulin or use an insulin pump . people with type 2 diabetes can be treated by exercise and diet . however , some people may need tablets and , or , insulin . there are many different types of tablets available for the treatment of type 2 diabetes . many of these tablets work differently from each other and often more than one type of tablet is used . 14 your doctor will prescribe a treatment which is best suited to you . your medications help to control your blood sugar levels in combination with a healthy diet and regular activity . will i have to pay for my medication s ? long term illness scheme ( lti ) diabetes is covered under the lti scheme for people resident in the republic of ireland . this means that all medication for diabetes and related conditions available to you free of charge under this scheme . this includes medication for high blood pressure and high cholesterol and glucose-testing strips . how to apply for the lti if you want to register for the lti scheme : ask your doctor to complete lti application form ; and submit this form to the local health service executive office . your doctor should be able to tell you where the local office is located . when you are registered under the lti scheme , you will receive an lti book in the post.it shows your registration number . registered patients may get their medication from any pharmacy . how does diabetes affect driving ? if you take tablets or insulin for diabetes , you must inform the driving license authority that you have diabetes . you can find the number for your local driving license authority in the telephone book . do i need to tell my car insurance company that i have diabetes ? you must inform your car insurance company that you have diabetes . if you don ’ t it may mean you are at risk of driving without insurance . your car insurance will not cost more when you have diabetes . for this report we take a different approach : we start by considering the implementation of genetic testing and screening in developing countries ; then identify some of the significant social features that affect the implementation of such services ; we explore the ethical , legal and social issues associated with these features and highlight some of the methods employed by different countries to address them . the report therefore does not aim to cover all the ethical aspects of genetic testing and screening , but rather to discuss in more detail some of the major ethical , legal , social and human rights issues that are specific to developing countries . many of these issues have been touched on in other international publications ; this report brings these themes together , at a time when there is an increasing body of empirical evidence regarding the experience of medical genetic services in developing countries and the ethical issues raised . the goal of this report is to expand and enrich the discussion of some of the major specific to medical genetic services in developing countries , and to suggest principles for effective management of the ethical , legal and social issues raised by genetic testing and screening in these contexts . the report does not specifically discuss the elsi related to the integration of genomics into public health more generally , the role of genetics in common chronic diseases or genomic research . these issues are important and the associated elsi deserve international attention . however , as this report focuses on the situation in developing countries , many of which are still in the process of establishing traditional medical genetic services , an analysis of these new issues would distract from the core elsi themes surrounding genetic testing and screening . nor does the report aim to provide a systematic analysis of the treatment , management and care options available for people with genetic conditions . the report focuses on the elsi of genetic testing and screening . issues relating to treatment and care of genetic conditions are raised only where they are relevant to discussion of the elsi . it is important at the outset to contextualize the health burden resulting from genetic and congenital disorders , within the wider picture of the often overwhelming health burdens facing developing , particularly low-income , countries . itis estimated that each year 11 million children die , the majority in developing countries , before their fifth birthday , mostly as a result of malnutrition or from diseases that are considered to be easily preventable in developed countries . in 2001 , life expectancies in developed countries were in the range of 75 to 80 years , while in developing countries they remained between 40 and 50 years . many developing countries now suffer from the burden of infectious diseases , such as hiv/aids , malaria and tuberculosis , in addition to the burden of chronic diseases , such as cardiovascular diseases , cancer , respiratory diseases and diabetes . 2hile this report discusses the burden of genetic and congenital disorders and makes recommendations about the services and systems required to support genetic testing and screening programmes , it is the responsibility of national governments to assess and prioritize the health needs of their populations . the priority assigned to genetic services , with respect to other health services , is a matter of public health policy in each country , and should be expected to differ accordingly . differences in countries epidemiology , demographic factors and health systems mean that no standard set of interventions can be applied globally . this report therefore discusses the principles of effective management of the elsi of genetic testing and screening . these principles will have to be translated into specific policies , appropriate to the local context , by individual governments . nevertheless , genetics is an important , and often under-recognized , contributing factor to disease and ill health worldwide ( 265 ) . inherited conditions affect millions of families throughout the world . it is estimated that about 5 % of all pregnancies result in the birth of a child with a significant congenital disorder , many of which are due in part to genetic factors . in developing countries hereditary conditions account for about15 % to 25 % of perinatal and infant mortality . at least 7.6 million children are born annually with a severe congenital and/or genetic disorder . in the absence of appropriate facilities and care , most of these children die undiagnosed , early in life . the overriding ethical issue is the lack of accessible , affordable , safe , medical care and services for these children and their families . while some of the issues and challenges raised by genetic testing and screening arise globally , there are other concerns that are specific or more prevalent in developing countries . for example , discrimination and stigmatization can present informal barriers to health care access worldwide . many international and national reports on genetic testing and screening have focused extensively on the potential for discrimination in relation to health insurance and employment . while this is also a concern in developing countries , an additional concern regarding stigmatization relates to the discrimination of female mutation carriers in communities with a high prevalence of autosomal recessive genetic diseases and a cultural preference for arranged marriage . other issues are equally relevant to developed and developing countries but have a greater impact in developing countries . for example , the concerns around commercial genetic testing are more acute in environments with lower levels of public testing facilities and limited ( or no ) regulatory structures in place to protect patient safety and provide quality assurance . such environments are more prevalent in developing , low-income , countries . the report will focus on seven major ethical , social and legal issues that apply to the introduction of medical genetic services . these are : distributive justice ; the social context in developing countries as it specifically relates to testing and screening , including consanguineous marriage , religion , gender , and views and policies on abortion for medical purposes ; stigmatization and discrimination ; protection of privacy and confidentiality ; facilitating patient decision-making ; genetics education ; and quality assurance and patient safety . for this report , we distinguish between developed and developing countries . although this terminology is not ideal , it is still used extensively in the literature and there is at present no widely accepted alternative . for the purposes of clarity we use the world bank classification of developed and developing countries which is attached in appendix a. according to the world bank classification , developed countries include all high-income economies except china hong kong special administrative region ( hong kong sar ) , israel , kuwait , singapore , and the united arab emirates . these five countries are classified as developing despite their high per capita income because of their economic structure or the official opinion of their governments . developing countries therefore include all low-income and middle-income economies , as well as the five high-income economies mentioned above . primer of medical genetics and genetic services : this section will introduce the concepts of genes , genetics and inheritance . it includes a review of current genetic diagnostic technologies , the types of genetic tests , their goals and their possible uses in public health in the context of medical genetic services . in addition , the main strategies for the prevention and care of genetic diseases and their relevance for developing countries are presented . genes and chromosomes : the human genome is constituted by very long chains of deoxyribonucleic acid ( dna ) , packaged in structures called chromosomes , which are located in the nucleus of the cells . humans possess two sets of 23 chromosomes , one set derived from each parent , carrying the same genes . a gene is a segment of dna that instructs the cell to produce a specific polypeptide . the sex chromosomes are xy because this is a male karyotype ; a female karyotype would have xx . deoxyribonucleic acid : dna is the main chemical structure of the gene , and consists of two long strings of nucleotide bases . there are four bases : adenine ( a ) , guanine ( g ) , cytosine ( c ) and thymine ( t ) . dna ’ s ‘ instruction code ’ is determined by the sequence of the four constitutive bases , in such a way that units of three bases form informational units , each with a ‘ meaning ’ that instructs the cell machinery to incorporate a specific amino acid during the assembly of a polypeptide or protein . proteins , in turn , are chains of amino acids that fulfil essential biological functions , as structural proteins and as enzymes . mendelian inheritance : if a man and a woman have identical alleles ( gene copies ) at the same gene locus , called for example , they can only produce germ cells ( sperm or eggs ) of type ‘ a ’ , and consequently can only have children with an ‘ aa ’ geno-type . if , on the other hand , ‘ a ’ exists in another form ( or allele ) , and the genotype of the father is ‘ aa ’ and the mother is ‘ aa ’ , then although the father can only produce ‘ a ’ germ cells , half the mothers will be ‘ a ’ , and half will be ’ a ’ . it follows that half the children will have the genotype ‘ aa ’ and half ‘ aa ’ . on the other hand , if both parents have the genotype ‘ aa ’ , then one quarter of the children will have the genotype ‘ aa ’ . if the a allele causes a disease , its appearance in families will depend on whether it is dominantly inherited ( expressed in heterozygotes , aa ) or recessively inherited ( expressed in homozygotes , aa ) . if dominantly inherited , on average half the children of an affected parent will be affected . if recessively inherited , on average quarter of the children of aa parents ( heterozygotes or carriers ) will be affected ( aa ) . two features of the human genome are of note . in the first place , the approximately 25 , 000 genes of the human genome constitute only about 2 % of the length of the genome : the remaining 98 % of the dna does not code for any protein and its function is still largely unknown . secondly , there is a very small fraction of coding dna that is not in the chromosomes , but instead in special organelles in the cytoplasm of the cells , called mitochondria . mitochondrial genes are essential in the production of proteins involved in energy metabolism and are transmitted to the offspring only by the mother . each individual inherits a single copy of the whole genome from the father and the mother , thus harboring two copies of each gene , except for the genes located in the sex chromosomes . in addition , each individual inherits the mitochondrial genes from the mother . the genome has the inherent characteristic of undergoing mutations , changes in its dna sequence . mutations may involve substitutions , deletions or duplications of bases , and have been occurring in the dna of all species for millions of years . in humans , gene mutations occur spontaneously or may be triggered by environmental factors such as radiation , infections or exposure to certain chemicals . when new gene mutations occur in the dna of germ cells , they can be transmitted to offspring , accounting for the accumulation of such mutations in the population after tens or hundreds of generations . thus , the genes of all human beings carry some variations ( mutations ) in their dna structure . dna mutations can ( a ) be neutral with respect to disease ; ( b ) result in a small change in function affecting disease susceptibility ; or ( c ) result in significant alteration of function . some mutations in genes determine a change in the dna instruction code ; a subset of gene mutations can result in the production of an abnormal or deficient protein , or even the absence of a produced protein . depending on the function and importance of the protein in question , disease may result . this chain of events is mediated by numerous other intervening factors ( other gene products , environmental factors , etc . ) such that it is rare for a gene mutation by itself to determine all the clinical manifestations ( or lack thereof ) associated with a particular condition . genes in families and populations : genes are transmitted from parents to offspring through the reproductive cells ( gametes ) : the male ’ s sperm and the females eggs . each gamete contains a single copy of each gene ( haploid number ) . the diploid genome ( two copies of each gene ) is reconstituted in the fertilized egg . the observable expression of a gene ( trait , characteristic or clinical manifestations of disease ) is called the phenotype . there are some autosomal diseases that are manifested when only one copy ( allele ) of the gene enharbours a deleterious mutation . these diseases are called dominant , because the ill effect of the affected allele overpowers the expression of the normal allele . in other autosomal diseases , the clinical manifestations occur only when both copies of a gene have a deleterious mutation : these are called recessive diseases . in the case of x-linked recessive diseases , where the deleterious allele is located on the x chromosome , males can express the phenotype when they have only one copy of the allele . women who are carriers have the disease allele on one x chromosome , and a normal allele on the other , and so do not usually express the . individuals who carry a single dose of an autosomal recessive mutation are healthy because the function of the normal gene is sufficient to avoid disease . these individuals are called carriers . it is important to recognize that for every patient with a recessive disease in a population , there exist many healthy carriers of a single dose of the affected allele ; in other words , recessive genes exist in populations mainly in single doses , causing no disease in the carrier . the maintenance of a recessive gene mutation in a population occurs essentially through transmission from a carrier parent to the offspring.it is only when two prospective parents are both carriers of the same mutation that there is probability of having affected children ( those who inherit the mutation from both parents ) . the knowledge of this phenomenon is the basis for carrier screening programmes for recessive conditions particularly prevalent in some populations , which provide couples and individuals with information for reproductive purposes . the evolving concept of genetic disease : the concept of genetic disease has been evolving along with advances in medicine , medical genetics and our ability to analyze the human genome . the molecular study of genes and their relationship to health and disease started with linus pauling characterization of the molecular defect in the gene for one of the hemoglobin chains , which causes sickle cell disease . in the subsequent 50 years , hundreds of disease-causing gene mutations were identified , a process that was accelerated by the human genome project , which sequenced the whole human genome . of the approximately25 000 genes presumed to constitute the human genome , 15 000 have been identified thus far . a great amount of human genetic variation has been uncovered and the very concept of genetic disease is in revision . in fact , we now know that virtually all diseases have a genetic component , at the same time as we know that all diseases have environmental components . environmental factors , in fact , account for most of the burden of disease and the variations in prevalence of diseases among populations , including diseases with a genetic component . in this report , we use a very broad definition of genetic disease : that of any condition in which there is an identifiable genetic component in causation . while this definition helps to include conditions such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases , the fact remains that the latter are due primarily to environmental factors.in fact , the uncovering of genetic influences in virtually all diseases will perhaps render the term genetic disease obsolete , and we will soon be talking rather of diseases with major or minor genetic components , according to the relative weight of genetic factors in causation . notwithstanding these considerations , this report will adhere to the current classification of the three major categories of diseases with genetic components : chromosomal abnormalities , monogenic diseases and multifactorial diseases . chromosomal abnormalities the first category of genetic conditions , well known since the 1970s , is caused by chromosomal abnormalities , which are usually genetic accidents occurring at the time of conception ( such as the non-disjunction of homologous chromosomes in the formation of the gametes ) , as a result of which the fertilized egg is conceived with an excess or deficiency of chromosomal material . the most common example is trisomy 21 ( down syndrome ) , where chromosome 21 is present in triplicate due to an accidental error in the formation of one of the gametes . chromosomal disorders also include those occurring as a result of structural rearrangement of chromosomal material and micro-deletions of portions of the chromosome . chromosome imbalances contribute to about 1020 % of the public health burden of spontaneous abortion , congenital anomalies , mental retardation and developmental disorders worldwide . monogenic diseases : second category of diseases with a genetic component is that due to major mutations or highly penetrant mutations . diseases resulting from a major mutation in a single gene are called monogenic diseases , single-gene diseases , or mendelian diseases , because they are inherited in families following the laws of inheritance described by mendel : autosomal recessive , autosomal dominant , and x-linked inheritance . there are about 1500 monogenic diseases where the genetic defect has been identified . they tend to cause severe illness and a wide range of clinical manifestations depending on the function of the gene involved . typical examples are the haemoglobinopathies ( thalassaemia , sickle cell disease ) , cystic fibrosis , phenylketonuria , the haemophilias , muscular dystrophies , huntington disease and neurofibromatosis . while individually are , they affect collectively about 1 % of thepopulation worldwide . multifactorial diseases a third category of diseases with a genetic component is the result of complex long-lasting interactions between environmental factors ( nutrition , infections , exposure to toxins , living conditions and lifestyle , psychosocial stress , etc . ) and gene variations of minor effect . these diseases are called multifactorial because many different factors contribute to their causation . multifactorial diseases constitute the major bulk of the global burden of disease . they include congenital anomalies , coronary artery disease , cancers , mental illness , diabetes , obesity , hypertension and many others . while single-gene conditions refer to one end of a spectrum where the effect of a mutation in a single gene is sufficient to cause disease , in multifactorial diseases an overriding effect of any single gene is not evident and non-genetic factors are increasingly relevant . here , mutations in any particular gene are neither necessary nor sufficient to independently cause a disease . rather , the concerted interactions between several genetic variants and environmental factors combine to create a state of health or disease . the genetic component of these diseases is variable and does not usually account for more than 1020 % of the attributable risks . this genetic component does not necessarily determine disease and can be better understood as the impact of many genes of minor effect that increase or reduce the probability that an individual will develop condition , in interaction with adverse environmental factors . variations in genetic susceptibility can also explain increased or reduced resistance to infectious agents . distribution of genetic diseases in the population and impact on morbidity and mortality : the factors that influence the prevalence of genetic diseases in populations and their impact on the public ’ s health are best understood by specific category of disease . chromosomal abnormalities : chromosomal abnormalities occur mostly as a result of biological errors in the transmission of chromosomes from parents to offspring . the average birth prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities in liveborn is 1 in 200 , and the most common example is down syndrome . the following fundamental features of chromosomal abnormalities are of note : the occurrence of non-disjunction , and hence the prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities , is highly correlated with ma-ternal age . thus , the incidence of these conditions varies according to the maternal age structure of the population . for example the prevalence at birth of down syndrome is 1 in 1000 among mothers younger than 30 years and about 1 in 100 in mothers over 35 years old . the occurrence of chromosomal abnormalities at each maternal age is similar in all populations . the main clinical manifestations of chromosomal abnormalities are congenital anomalies , mental retardation and infertility . further , they are the main cause of miscarriages , as the overwhelming majority of chromosomally abnormal embryos are aborted spontaneously ( an estimated 60 % of spontaneous abortions involve a fetus affected by a chromosome abnormality ) . it is estimated that chromosomal abnormalities are responsible for about 1020 % of congenital anomalies and mental retardation in children . the development of prenatal screening and prenatal diagnosis is reducing the prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities in countries where these services are avail-able and accessible , as they are in developed countries . socio-cultural circumstances and limited access to family planning in developing countries contribute to a higher proportion of births at advanced maternal age , explaining a higher prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities . this is further compounded by the lack of prenatal screening programmes and accessible pre-natal diagnosis services . single-gene diseases : most of the several hundred known single-gene diseases are individually rare ( prevalences at birth of 1 in 2 , 000 to 1 in 100 , 000 ) . however , they collectively affect about 1 % of the population worldwide and tend to have serious clinical manifestations , high morbidity and early mortality , and primarily affect the pediatric population . since these conditions are due chiefly to inherited gene mutations , their prevalence in a population depends on the frequency of deleterious mutations . in turn , the gene frequency of a particular mutation in a population depends on several factors : when the mutation appeared for the first time and in which population ; the frequency of the new mutation ; whether the mutation is expressed in a dominant or recessive manner . its clinical manifestations and how these affect survival and reproduction of those who carry it ; the process of natural selection ; demographic phenomena such as reproductive patterns . migrations and founder effects ; and genetic drift due to chance variation . varying combinations of the above phenomena explain the variations in the prevalence of a particular single-gene disease in different populations . well-known examples are : sickle cell disease , more prevalent in africa and in people of african descent ( and the asian sickle cell disease haplotype more prevalent in populations in the middle east , the mediterranean basin the indian subcontinent ) ; thalassaemias , more prevalent in people of african , mediterranean and south-east asian descent ; cystic fibrosis , more prevalent in populations of northern european descent ; and tay sachs disease , more prevalent among people of ashkenazi jewish descent . in addition , some single-gene diseases have reached very high frequencies ( clusters ) in specific populations due to a combination of founder effect , genetic drift and genetic isolation . examples are huntington disease in venezuela . spinocerebellar atrophy type 2 in cuba , and oculocutaneous albinism in south africa . single-gene disorders cause a significant burden to public health either when they are widely prevalent , like the haemoglobinopathies , or when the phenomenon of founder effect and reproductive patterns determine a high prevalence in a particular population , as in the above noted examples . autosomal dominant late-onset diseases there are a number of autosomal dominant late- onset diseases that are particularly frequent in some populations because of demographic factors , suchas founder effects and social or geographic isolation . in some cases , in particular population clusters , these diseases have reached levels that have a significant adverse impact on that populations health . one such example is spinocerebellar atrophy type 2 in the province of holguin , cuba , where hundreds of affected individuals , and thousands of at-risk individuals , live . a public health programme of pre-symptomatic testing of at-risk individuals , followed by genetic counselling and the offer of prenatal diagnosis , has been put in place by the public health system . similar situation exists for huntington disease in the maracaibo lake region of venezuela , which is home to hundreds of affected individuals and thousands of people at risk . common multifactorial diseases : the common diseases resulting from environment gene interactions and mentioned are sometimes called diseases of affluence because they acquired notoriety when developed countries started an epidemiological transition based on the control of infectious disease in the middle of the twentieth century . common multifactorial conditions , often referred to as chronic diseases , are responsible for the majority of morbidity and mortality worldwide . they include coronary artery disease , many cancers , hypertension , diabetes , obesity , asthma and mental illness , among others . while it is true that these common chronic diseases , mostly of adulthood , are the most significant health problem in affluent societies , their importance is growing alarmingly in developing countries . conclusion : while the existence and prevalence of genetic diseases ( excluding common multifactorial conditions ) in developing countries is well documented , the recognition of their significance for public health is recent . socioeconomic and cultural changes and improvements in maternal child health , nutrition , and control of infectious diseases in developing countries are causing an epidemiological transition whereby the contribution of genetic and congenital disorders to the burden of morbidity and mortality is more exposed . it must be noted , however , that over the last decade there has been a deterioration of the health situation in many developing countries , resulting from globalization , increased levels of poverty , privatization of services and inequities in health care . previous improvements in health indicators are also being eroded by the hiv/aids pandemic , the resurgence or resilience of old infections such as tuberculosis and malaria , pervasive malnutrition , and the current obesity epidemic . thus , a more accurate label of these phenomena is epidemiological accumulation rather than transition , as new morbidities are superimposed on old ones . nevertheless , there can be no doubt that multifactorial conditions , including congenital anomalies and common diseases , contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality in developing countries . genetic tests and their use : in the past couple of decades , a number of interventions aimed at the early detection , prevention and care of health problems caused by genetic factors , have been developed and implemented in developed countries . these developments have been facilitated by new or improved diagnostic technologies such as fetal ultrasound , improved cytogenetic techniques and biochemical analysis , direct analysis of genes causing monogenic disorders ( dna testing ) and prenatal diagnosis . in fact , there seems to be considerable hype about genetics in developed countries , where the capacity of genetic approaches to prevent and treat common diseases is perhaps exaggerated . in contrast , developing countries have been lagging in their implementation of public policies for the care and prevention of genetic diseases . it should be noted that both in developed and developing countries , even diseases with genetic components have overwhelmingly higher social , environmental and lifestyle attributable risks , and therefore their prevention will continue to require the control of those identified risks ( exposure to toxins like tobacco , sedentarism , poor diet , psychosocial stress and others ) . furthermore , the tendency to see genetic testing as the solution to the health problems posed by genetic diseases , out of the context of the health care system and genetic services , is not only ineffective but also fraught with a number of ethical risks . in this section , we will first review current genetic diagnostic technologies , the types of genetic tests , their goals and their possible uses in public health in the context of medical genetic services . in the next section we will analyze the main existing strategies for the prevention and care of genetic diseases and their relevance for developing countries . the development of genetic technologies has been most fruitful in devising tests to detect genetic abnormalities at the level of the chromosomes and the genes . the application of these diagnostic technologies is most advanced in developed countries , where the diagnosis of genetic diseases is shifting from analysis of the clinical manifestations to analysis of chromosome or molecular defects . further , genetic tests are being applied not only to individuals with symptoms or signs of disease ( classically referred to as patients ) but also to asymptomatic and healthy individuals ( whom the term patients does not fit well ) to determine genetic predispositions and predict the future onset of disease . the proliferation of new genetic diagnostic tools has been accompanied by confusion about terminology , and there are varying definitions of what constitutes a genetic test . indeed , the definition of genetic test suffers from the same ambiguities as the definition of what constitutes a genetic disease , as alluded to above . the confusion stems from the fact that genetic diseases can be diagnosed by many other approaches than dna testing : family history , physical examination , imaging techniques such as radiographs and ultrasound as well as biochemical and morphological laboratory tests that do not look at the genetic material itself . for the purpose of this report , a genetic test is defined as a laboratory test that analyses a particular configuration of the genetic material , be it ( a ) by direct analysis at the level of a gene or a chromosome , or ( b ) by testing a direct gene product ribonucleic acid ( rna ) , a structural protein or an enzyme or key metabolite . many of the other tests that reveal genetic information , but which fall outside this definition of genetic test , are also considered in the report because they form an important part of medical genetic services , particularly in developing countries . further , the ethical issues surrounding the use of genetic information are similar , irrespective of whether the information is generated through genetic tests or other investigations . many national and international guidelines and regulations , discussed throughout the report , include their own definitions of genetic test , some of which differ from this specific definition . goals of genetic tests : testing and screening : the main purposes of genetic tests are : diagnostic genetic testing : to diagnose a genetic disease ( chromosomal or mono-genic ) in a symptomatic patient ; presymptomatic genetic diagnosis : to make a prediction of future development of a monogenic disease in an asymptomatic individual ; predisposition genetic testing : to make a probabilistic estimation of the likelihood of future development of a multifactorial disease in a healthy individual ; genetic carrier testing : to determine whether a healthy individual is a carrier of a recessive mutation that may increase his/her risk of having affected offspring ; and prenatal genetic testing : to identify fetuses at increased risk of congenital abnormality . genetic tests can be applied to individuals in the context of health care , or to populations in the context of public health programmes . the term genetic testing usually refers to the use of genetic testing in individuals and families in the context of clinical care with the goals noted above . genetic testing is defined as testing offered to people already known to be at increased genetic risk in order to achieve a definitive diagnosis . for the purposes of the report , we use wald ’ s definition of screening : the systematic application of a test or enquiry to identify individuals at sufficient risk of specific disorder to benefit from further investigation or direct preventive action among people who have not sought medical attention because of the symptoms of that disorder . within this context , genetic screening refers to a basic test that is systematically offered to a defined population , in order to identify a group at increased genetic risk , who may then be offered further tests leading to a definitive diagnosis . characteristics of genetic tests : three main attributes are used to assess the health benefit of a genetic test : its analytical validity , its clinical validity , and its clinical utility . analytical validity refers to the performance of a genetic test in the laboratory , that is , the tests ability to detect the trait it seeks to measure ( dna , chromosomes , proteins or metabolites ) . the main items to consider in the analytical validity of a test are its sensitivity ( ability to detect an abnormality if it is present ) , its specificity ( results should be negative if there is no abnormality ) , and its reliability ( the probability of obtaining the same result consistently ) . the determination of the analytical validity of a genetic test is the responsibility of quality control state agencies . the clinical validity of a test refers to the accuracy with which it predicts the presence or absence of a clinical condition or predisposition . the components of clinical validity include : the probability that the test will be positive in patients with the disease in question ( clinical sensitivity ) ; the probability that the test will be negative inpatients without the disease ( clinical specificity ) ; the probability that patients with a positive result will develop the disease ( positive predictive value ) ; and the probability that patients with negative results will not manifest the disease ( negative predictive value ) . the clinical utility of a test refers to the actual usefulness of the test in improving the health and well-being of the persons tested , and it depends largely on whether the information provided by the test can be followed by effective and safe preventive or therapeutic interventions . given the increasing commercialization of genetic tests , it is not uncommon that they are marketed to the public without proper validation ( based on analytical validity , clinical validity and clinical utility ) in both developed and developing countries . the use of genetic tests that are not accurate , safe and effective is not only a waste of scarce health resources but also an unethical practice that puts the health and well-being of the public in jeopardy . it is an essential function and responsibility of the public health agencies in each country to ensure the characterization and validation of genetic tests by determining their analytical validity , clinical validity and clinical utility before they are utilized in health care . types of genetic tests and their possible application : in this section , the different types of genetic tests are discussed in conjunction with their applications . the availability and accessibility of all the different types of genetic tests are fraught with the usual inequities common to all health care services : access is better for individuals in urban centres , developed countries and the middle upperclasses , and worse in rural areas , developing countries and lower socioeconomic classes . chromosome tests : techniques for the genetic testing of chromosomal abnormalities have been in place for the past 40 years and are being applied worldwide . chromosome analysis is sometimes performed to confirm the diagnosis of a chromosome abnormality in patients suspected of having such conditions . newer techniques combine the classic analysis of the number and structure of chromosomes ( standard chromosome analysis ) , with high resolution and molecular cytogenetic analysis for the detection of sub-microscopic structural defects that may explain a patients condition . these techniques are also widely used in oncology to detect genetic abnormalities in tumour cells to define prognosis and guide treatment in a variety of cancers . the widest application of chromosome analysis is in the prenatal diagnosis of fetal chromosomal abnormalities in chorionic villi and amniotic fluid cells . several hundred thousand pregnancies are subjected to prenatal chromosome diagnosis annually , primarily in developed countries . dna tests in the diagnosis of symptomatic individuals there are currently over 1000 disease-associated genes that can be tested to aid the diagnosis of disease in patients suspected to have a monogenic disease or those at risk . this is indeed the major application of genetic testing in medicine thus far . the interpretation of results is not always straightforward , as there are often many nuances and subtleties . the clinical validity and clinical utility of each test vary according to the disease in question , the gene tested and the techniques employed . dna tests in prenatal diagnosis : the same principles and techniques used in dna testing for diagnostic purposes in symptomatic patients can be used for the genetic testing of a fetus at high risk for a specific single-gene disease . fetal cells are usually obtained from chorionic villi at 10 weeks of gestation or amniotic fluid at 14-16 weeks of gestation . both procedures are associated with a risk of procedure-induced abortion of 0.5 1 % , depending on the skills and experience of the operator . since the early 1990s , a procedure called pre- implantation genetic diagnosis ( pgd ) has been available to couples at risk of having a pregnancy affected by a genetic condition or chromosomal abnormality , as an alternative to prenatal diagnosis and termination of pregnancy . pgd involves a test performed on a single cell biopsied from the embryo at the 8-16 cell stage after in and before embryo implantation in the uterus . over 1000 procedures have now been performed in developed countries . pgd is a very expensive and high-tech procedure , whose long-term safety and efficacy is still under investigation . dna tests for predictive purposes : genetic testing is also used to predict the probability that an individual might develop a gene-associated disease in the future . in cases of monogenic diseases that have not yet presented symptoms , predictive testing is usually referred to as presymptomatic genetic testing . this type of genetic testing is mostly used to predict the development of autosomal dominant late-onset genetic diseases ( for example , huntington disease , spinocerebellar atrophy , familial adenomatous polyposis ) and is offered to high-risk individuals in families in which the disease is present . presymptomatic genetic testing is most notably offered to the offspring of an affected individual , who face a 50 % probability of having inherited the affected allele , in which case they would in all certainty develop the disease in the future . the ideal goal of presymptomatic genetic testing is to implement preventive or therapeutic measures to stem the development of the disease or reduce its severity . unfortunately , there are at present no such safe or effective health interventions for most known late-onset genetic diseases , making the clinical utility of their presymptomatic diagnosis rather low . for other monogenic conditions , like haemochromatosis and factor vleiden , genetic testing in the absence of symptoms or positive family history has low predictive value because of low penetrance and the presence of , as yet , poorly understood concurrent factors ( both genetic and environmental ) . genetic testing for multifactorial diseases aims to detect genetic variants associated with an increased probability of developing one of those conditions . this is called predisposition genetic testing , where a positive result would theoretically mean a higher than average susceptibility to develop the disease when environmental risk factors ( usually more important in causation ) are also at play . much research is targeted at detecting susceptibility alleles for common diseases in the hope that this knowledge may illuminate the mechanisms of disease , the causative role of genetic and environmental factors , and the development of newer methods of prevention and treatment . however , for the vast majority of multifactorial diseases , the genetic underpinnings of disease remain unknown and most predisposing mutations uncovered so far have very low penetrance and hence very low clinical validity . the only example of predisposition testing in a multifactorial condition demonstrating preliminary clinical validity is testing for mutations in the brca1 and brca2 genes in the assessment of breast and ovarian cancer risk in women with positive family history . the high clinical validity of this testing depends on the careful selection of patients ( those at high risk because of family history ) and on the fact that the mentioned genes are known to have high penetrance ( quasi-dominant ) . even when patient selection is adequate , the risk of future disease predicted by the test remains around 60 % . other examples of predisposition tests of potential clinical validity include tests for colon cancer , thyroid cancer , cardiomyopathies and alzheimer disease . the term genomic hype has been used to describe the belief that detecting individuals with higher than average genetic susceptibility to multifactorial diseases is the right approach to conquering diseases like coronary artery disease , diabetes , obesity and many cancers . for most of these diseases , environmental and lifestyle factors have attributable risks higher than 80 % , and the whole population is therefore at risk . furthermore , public health interventions aimed at the general population are thought to be safer and more effective ( for example , programmes to promote tobacco cessation and avoidance of exposure to possible carcinogens , physical exercise , diet , among others ) . dna tests for carrier status for reproductive purposes : genetic testing can be used to detect healthy carriers of recessive genes , with the aim of detecting couples in which both spouses carry the same recessive gene and , thus , are at risk of having affected offspring ; or women who are carriers of an x- linked recessive disorder . it is important to note , however , that in practice many tests used to identify carriers are not dna-based genetic tests . carrier genetic testing can be indicated in individuals with a positive family history of the disease in question . individuals tested can use their genetic information to make informed reproductive decisions . carrier genetic testing can also be aimed at the population at large , or at specific subpopulation groups , defined by age , gender or ethnicity . when carrier genetic testing is aimed at populations it is usually referred to as carrier genetic screening . screening for carriers of recessive mutations should be a function of the public health system and should meet a number of requirements before being undertaken : the condition in question should have high prevalence ; the condition in question should impose a significant health burden on the population ; the gene in question should be easily and inexpensively tested ; the analytical validity and clinical validity of the test should justify the screening ; genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis should be available ; and termination of affected pregnancies , for women who voluntarily choose to use this service , should be a feasible option . in addition , steps should be taken to educate communities and their leaders , and the population should have a clear interest in the programme.programmes should be strictly voluntary and there should be no pressure of any kind on anyone to be tested or to take any specific steps after results are delivered ( such as marrying , embarking on a pregnancy , having prenatal diagnosis , continuing or terminating an affected pregnancy ) . carrier screening programmes and the associated services should be implemented in a manner that is responsive to , and sensitive of , the populations religious and cultural views . examples demonstrating where and how this has been achieved are presented throughout the report . a number of successful carrier genetic screening programmes supported by education , counselling and access to prenatal diagnosis are in place in both developed and developing countries , particularly for the haemoglobinopathies and diseases common among ashkenazi jews . newborn screening : newborn screening is the dean of genetic screening programmes applied on very large and systematic scale for the past 40 years , both in developed countries and in some developing countries . it began in developed nations in the1960s with screening for phenylketonuria ( pku ) , which was followed soon after by screening for congenital hypothyroidism ( ch ) . the rationale for newborn screening accords with the paradigm of public health : early detection and ( preventive ) treatment before symptoms begin . again , many tests used in newborn screening are not dna-based tests . there are a number of prerequisites for the development and implementation of newborn screening . first , the condition to be screened for must be : severe ; frequent ; and amenable to easy , safe , reliable and in expensive laboratory diagnosis on a very large scale . second , a treatment that is cost-effective and makes a significant difference when it is started soon after birth rather than after symptoms are established should be available . third , there should be an effective treatment and follow-up programme for the affected infants identified , and every step of the programme should be the responsibility of the state and should ideally be offered free of charge . finally , the country should have a functional and well-structured public health system and good centralized laboratories to provide infrastructure for the screening programme . most importantly , newborn screening should have public support and be supported by adequate and sustainable public funding . over the last 20 years , new conditions have become candidates for newborn screening , and theiraddition to the testing panel has followed political , economic , medical and societal pressures . alldeveloped countries have instituted newborn screening programmes for pku , congenital hypothyroidism and a variable number of other conditions . developing countries have been slow to implement newborn screening and most have not yet started , as the above mentioned prerequisites are rarely fulfilled . in cuba and some large urban centres in argentina and brazil , newborn screening is available for pkuand ch . only cuba , however , can claim more than 50 % coverage of their newborn population ( in cuba coverage is in fact over 95 % ) . developed countries are increasingly resorting to dna testing for some newborn screening tests , and some are implementing tandem mass spectrometry to increase the number of conditions tested . the main challenge is to ensure accessibility to diagnostic confirmation studies , treatment and follow-up services . developing countries should : ( a ) weigh carefully their priorities in health care in general and in genetics in particular ; ( b ) consider the required infrastructure and services ; and ( c ) analyze issues of cost-effectiveness , before embarking on newborn screening programmes . medical genetic services : medical genetic services are those that provide health interventions for the prevention and management of genetic diseases . the goal of health interventions in genetics is the care and prevention of diseases with a significant genetic contribution in their causation . health interventions in genetics are organized as ( a ) medical genetic services as part of general health care services , which address primarily the care and management of individuals and families with , or at risk for , genetic diseases and congenital defects , and ( b ) as public health genetic programmes aimed at populations , with the main purpose of prevention . the essential components of genetic services and public health genetic programmes suitable for developing countries have been described in several publications . common themes in all recommendations are as follows . genetic services and public health genetic programmes should combine prevention with the best possible care for affected individuals and their families . genetic services and public health genetic programmes should prioritize simple , low technology and cost-effective activities , according to the prevalence and severity of existing genetic diseases and the expectations and cultural traditions of the community ( in a way that does not perpetuate or reinforce existing discriminatory practices ) . programmes should be focused on genetic risk detection and subsequent referral . genetic services should be rooted in primary health care , and linked with regional secondary and tertiary levels of care in a rational manner . primary health care personnel should be properly trained to perform defined tasks , such as finding out and interpreting a family history , detecting reproductive genetic risks , and detecting signs and symptoms that require referral to the next level of care . genetic testing and screening should be voluntary , offered only in the context ofcomprehensive genetics service delivery and accompanied by proper genetic counselling appropriate to the test and clinical context . proper attention must be paid to the ethical , legal and social issues associated with genetic testing and screening . from the outset it is important to dispel some common misconceptions regarding the role of genetics in health care and the relevance of these issues in developing countries . dispelling misconceptions : dispelling misconceptions misconception 1 : genetic variations are the main cause of ill health at the global level while it is true that virtually all diseases have a genetic component , it is equally true that all diseases have environmental components , and that disease is the result of environment gene interactions . in fact , and except for chromosomal abnormalities and monogenic diseases which collectively affect less than 2 % of the population anywhere in the world the bulk of morbidity and mortality largely results from environmental factors , even for diseases where genetic predispositions are significant . although the genetic constitution of individuals is important , the main reasons that the common multifactorial diseases have a larger proportional share of morbidity and mortality ( as opposed to infectious diseases and malnutrition ) in developed countries than in developing countries is precisely because of differences in environmental circumstances ( nutrition , toxic exposures , immunizations , lifestyles , sedentarism , access to healthcare , etc . ) the burden of disease in developing countries is still loaded with infectious disease and malnutrition , and aggravated by poverty and lack of access to health care , primarily prenatal and delivery services and infant care . misconception 2 : genetics is not relevant in developing countries as already stated above , and emphasized in numerous publications , genetic and congenital diseases in developing countries do exist and contribute to excessive morbidity and mortality . the fact that other scourges ( like poverty , hiv/aids , tuberculosis , malaria , malnutrition and conditions secondary to poor prenatal care and delivery conditions ) have made genetic diseases somewhat invisible thus far does not mean that the health system should neglect them . most importantly , a number of them can be prevented or managed . further , care and management should be available to all patients with genetic and congenital diseases . genetic and congenital diseases contribute to economic , social and developmental stagnation because of the severity of their manifestations , the stigmatization they engender , and the high costs of their treatment and care . misconception 3 : there is a dichotomy between care and prevention of genetic and congenital diseases from the public health point of view , care and management of these complex chronic conditions are expensive and require many human and technical resources . in this field , however , prevention of the occurrence of disease and care of the affected , go hand in hand . indeed , cost-effective prevention approaches reduce the number of affected individuals and free resources for the care of individuals with the disease . in turn , care of patients with the condition is not only an ethical obligation based on the right to health , but also increases the trust of the population in the goals of the public health system . the experience of successful programmes in cuba , cyprus , the islamic republic of iran , thailand and many more countries , supports this contention . misconception 4 : genetic testing and screening have a value in themselves , out of the context of genetic services the aggressive marketing of genetic tests without proper validation and outside the context of clinical genetic services is common both in developed and developing countries . this practice , however , is at odds with the who recommendations that genetic testing and screening should not be implemented where there are no genetic services and that genetic services should be part of health services accessible to the entire population . genetic counselling : genetic counselling is an indivisible part of the delivery of genetic services . genetic counselling has been defined as the process by which patients or relatives at risk of a disorder that may be hereditary are advised of the consequences of the disorder , the probability of developing or transmitting it and the ways this may be prevented , avoided or ameliorated and as an educational process that seeks to as- sist affected and/or at risk individuals to understand the nature of the genetic disorder , its transmission and the options open to them in management and family planning . central to the process of genetic counselling is its educational , voluntary and non-directive nature . the main goal of genetic counselling is to empower individuals and couples to make their own informed decisions when facing genetic risks , according to their own values . patients and individuals at genetic risk need unbiased and objective information on which to base difficult decisions regarding health and reproduction issues . autonomous decisions should enjoy the support of health providers . in the same way that medical practice and health care in general vary in different countries and cultures , a number of features of genetic counselling may vary . for example , in some countries genetic counselling is considered part of medical practice and provided by specially trained medical personnel ; in other countries non-physicians are trained in genetic counselling to provide the service . at present there is a shortage of health personnel adequately trained in genetic counselling in all countries , but particularly in developing countries . given the contextual differences in health care , social , cultural , religious and legal factors , the modalities for delivering genetic counselling , including the personnel who provide the service , should be left to each country to determine . defining the minimum training required for health personnel to provide genetic counselling is the basic priority . training primary health professionals ( general physicians , nurses , social workers , etc . ) in genetic counselling in developing countries would help to address these shortages . clinical genetic services : historically , clinical genetic services were developed in major hospitals in large urban centres , in both developed and developing countries , to provide diagnosis and counselling to patients with , or at risk for , genetic diseases and congenital anomalies . in developing countries , the major bottlenecks to increasing access to genetic services have been fundamentally the shortage of trained specialists , the lack of appropriate technology , the scarcity of funding and the lack of links with the primary health care level . the responsibilities of clinical genetics centres have been expanding from dealing with rare diseases to dealing with the genetic components of common diseases , particularly genetic susceptibility to cancer . in addition , medical genetic services have traditionally dealt with , and will probably continue to deal with , prevention and management of congenital anomalies , irrespective of their cause ( most congenital anomalies are environmental or multifactorial in nature ) . the challenge for developing countries is to define the type of genetic services needed according to the prevalence of genetic diseases . the development and implementation of services with a base in primary health care that follow sustainable cost-efficiency models are crucial . prenatal genetic services : prenatal genetic services are essential components of all public health programmes . these services are aimed at detecting genetic reproductive risks , through programmes such as carrier screening for prevalent recessive conditions and prenatal screening for neural tube defects and chromosomal abnormalities . experience shows that these programmes can only be successful when couples identified as at risk have access to diagnostic tests , free access to genetic counselling and the option to terminate affected pregnancies . these services should be adequately regionalized in tertiary care centres to ensure cost-efficiency and quality of service . an important limitation to the development of these services in developing countries is the prevalence of legal prohibitions that preclude selective abortion in cases of fetal abnormalities . however , this is slowly changing and abortion for fetal abnormality is now legal in a number of developing countries , such as china , cuba , cyprus , india , south africa and important localities in mexico , among others . genetic testing and screening : testing and screening are an essential component of genetic services and of public health genetic programmes . genetic testing and screening should be backed by proper genetic counselling , and should not be offered out of the broader context of health care service delivery . genetic testing and screening programmes should be implemented in a manner that is sensitive to the populations cultural practices and religious views and in accordance with national legislation . public health applications of genetics : the main goal of public health applications of genetics is the reduction of the impact of genetic disorders on health and well-being , through primary prevention , prevention through reproductive options , and secondary prevention . the following general strategies for primary prevention in genetics were identified at the meeting of who experts ( who/hgn/ waopbd ) in 1999. primary prevention : primary prevention aims to reduce the occurrence of specific genetic diseases and congenital anomalies . general strategies for primary prevention include : public efforts to improve health , nutrition , education and reproductive autonomy , particularly of women ; avoidance of unintended pregnancies and proper birth spacing through access to contraception and other methods of family planning ; improved access to , and quality of , prenatal care ; improved quality of newborn care ; control of possible occupational mutagenic risks ; voluntary premarital genetic screening and counselling ( screening should be strictly voluntary , implemented through non-directive genetic counselling , and not coerced through direct or indirect social pressures ) ; pre-conceptional and peri-conceptional supplementation of vitamins , including folic acid , for women in the reproductive age group to reduce the risk of neural tube defects and possibly other birth defects ; encouraging women to procreate at the optimum reproductive ages ( 2035 years ) to reduce the risk of non-disjunction chromosomal abnormalities ; and avoidance of exposures to mutagens and teratogens ( such as , radiation , rubella , alcohol , tobacco and self-medications ) during pregnancy . primary prevention strategies are usually centrally planned and population-based and are implemented at the level of primary care by health personnel trained in genetics and community education . perhaps the best-known application of genetic knowledge in primary prevention of congenital conditions with a genetic component is the supplementation of folic acid to women of reproductive age and the fortification of staple foods with adequate levels of folic acid in many countries . this approach is based on the knowledge that neural tube defects are due in part to a deficiency of folic acid . significant reduction in the prevalence of neural tube defects at birth has consistently followed these interventions . prevention of exposure to mutagens , teratogens and other environmental toxins should have a larger role in public health than currently accomplished . prevention based on reproductive options : most public health applications of genetics have so far been directed at the prevention and control of chromosomal abnormalities and of specific recessive conditions particularly prevalent in defined populations . chromosomal abnormalities : chromosomal abnormalities affect approximately 1 in 200 live newborns and are a common cause of congenital malformations and mental retardation . they are largely non-hereditary , that is , they occur sporadically , without significant ethnic , socioeconomic or geographic variations , worldwide . maternal age is positively correlated with the prevalence at birth of the most common type of chromosomal abnormalities : the autosomal trisomies like down syndrome and the sex chromosome aneuploidies . the effect of maternal age is so strong that for over 30 years it has been the basis for selecting pregnancies at increased risk for chromosomal abnormalities ( usually those above 35 years of age ) as targets of preventive public health programmes . in addition , a number of biochemical markers in maternal blood and fetal ultrasound markers are now also used to identify pregnancies at increased risk of chromosomal abnormalities ( usually over 0.5 % ) . the preventive model followed by health care systems in developed countries is to institute such prenatal screening as part of routine prenatal care , followed by the offer of voluntary prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis on fetal cells obtained by chorionic villus sampling ( cvs ) at 10 weeks or amniocentesis at 14-16 weeks of gestation . these programmes should be implemented according to the principles of voluntariness , non-directive genetic counselling and informed consent . whether or not these principles are actually adhered to in practice , is discussed later in the report . these programmes have been very effective in significantly reducing the prevalence at birth of chromosomal abnormalities in developed countries . in developing countries these services are often not implemented in a way that maximizes public access or cost-effectiveness ; they are often available and accessible only to the wealthier 20 % of the population . recessive conditions : the public health model followed worldwide for the prevention of recessive genetic conditions prevalent in particular populations follows the sequence : ( a ) detection of carriers of the particular gene through genetic screening ; ( b ) ascertainment of carrier-carrier couples and subsequent genetic counselling ; ( c ) offer of prenatal diagnosis in pregnancy , and ( d ) offer of termination of affected pregnancies . this model requires that : ( a ) the condition is particularly prevalent in the defined population ; ( b ) the condition causes a significant health and economic burden to society ; ( c ) dna testing and prenatal diagnosis for the condition is available , cost-effective and equitably accessible through the health system to everyone at risk ; ( d ) there is a preventive public health policy based on voluntary decisions by the public with proper respect for reproductive rights ; ( e ) there are adequate plans for treatment of individuals with the condition without stigmatization or discrimination ; and ( f ) there are appropriate human resources for non-directive genetic counselling to all individuals and couples identified as being at high genetic risk . these requirements have been met in a number of countries or population groups for several recessive conditions ( this list is not complete ) : thalassaemia in cyprus , greece , italy and immigrant groups in the united king-dom , and more recently in thailand and the islamic republic of iran ; sickle cell disease in cuba ; sickle cell disease and thalassaemia in the united states ; and tay sachs disease and other recessive dis-eases common in ashkenazi jews . secondary prevention : secondary prevention aims to minimize the clinical manifestations of a genetic condition after the birth of an affected infant ; or to detect a genetic predisposition for a condition that presents later in life . the most important application of genetics in secondary prevention and early detection of genetic diseases is exemplified in newborn screening , whereby all newborns in a population are subjected to systematic testing for a list of specified conditions . the inclusion of a particular condition for screening in newborns depends on a number of factors , including the impact of that condition on the publics health , the feasibility of accurate and cost-effective screening and diagnostic methods , and the effectiveness of treatment , with a much better outcome if started immediately after birth . it is expected , then , that the conditions screened vary from country to country , and even within countries , as is the case in the united states , in which each state determines the conditions it screens for . typical conditions screened at birth are phenylketonuria , congenital hypothyroidism , haemoglobinopathies , cystic fibrosis and congenital deafness . newborn screening should be implemented as a public health programme , run by the public health system , which covers all steps in the sequence : screening ( of all newborns ) ; diagnostic confirmation ( of those newborns who screened positive ) ; referral for proper care ( usually lifelong ) ; and genetic counselling for the parents . genetics and genomics have so far played little role in newborn screening as the technologies for screening are biochemical or immunological . however , diagnostic confirmation of those screened positive relies increasingly upon dna techniques , and it is expected that genomics will play an ever increasing role in all steps of newborn screening . whether or not a country needs to institute a newborn screening programme is a matter of high complexity that should be decided by a vigorous analysis of the epidemiology of specific conditions technically amenable to screening . consideration must also be given to economic and social factors in addition to alternative options for the use of scarce health funds . challenges : the specific barriers to increasing the equitable provision of genetic services in developing countries vary according to local community , region and country . there are , however , common themes that affect most developing countries . these include poverty ; scarcity of trained health professionals ; low priority given to genetic services by policy-makers ; and cultural and religious factors including ethnicity , language , gender norms and practices , and geographic isolation . tensions may exist between providing treatment and focusing on the prevention of disease , which is exacerbated by the fact that the impact of preventive programmes can be difficult to measure in the absence of sound epidemiological data . barriers also include lack of education ( low literacy rates and little or no knowledge about genetics ) and misconceptions at the public , medical and health policy planning levels . the list below , compiled from results of a who consultation on genetic services in latin america , highlights the main barriers to effective and equitable genetic testing and screening programmes , and is applicable to most other developing countries . these are : competing health priorities , as the burden of other unmet health needs resulting from infectious disease , malnutrition , prenatal care , labour and delivery care and neonatal care remain ; opinion among the medical profession and public health officials that genetics is not a health priority ; misconceptions that genetic services are expensive and relevant only to rare dis-eases ; lack of understanding of the full range of options available for prevention of genetic disease , with prevention often misperceived as being limited to the abortion of affected fetuses ; and insufficient public education about genetic risks and the range of preventive options . it is important to note that the first of these barriers is a legitimate concern . developing countries face range of unmet health needs and this report doesn ’ t advocate prioritizing genetic diseases above all other demands on health resources . a just and fair health system will : ( a ) consider the burden of genetic disease in proportion to the total burden of ill health ; ( b ) consider the potential strategies to address it ; and ( c ) distribute resources accordingly.it follows that sound epidemiological data are required to assess these needs . the resources devoted to medical genetic services compared to other health services will vary from country to country depending on the needs and resources of their populations . the final four barriers listed above demonstrate where the problem lies . health planners are notable to weigh fairly the demands of genetic disease control against other health needs because the prevalence and burden of genetic diseases is under-recognized , and prevention is misconceived as expensive and dependent on sophisticated technologies . again the importance of sound epidemiological data should be emphasized : in the absence of adequate data it is hard to convince policy-makers of the need for , and impact of , genetic services . this report attempts to dispel these misconceptions , as have other publications . the case studies and other examples discussed throughout the text , demonstrate the innovative , varied , culturally sensitive , cost-effective ways that genetic screening and testing have been used in developing countries to improve public health . cost-effectiveness : cost-effectiveness analysis ( cea ) is an analytical method of illuminating the trade-offs inherent indecisions regarding scarce health care resources and competing health demands . the point of cea is to display which , among a range of alternatives , either : ( a ) maximizes the desirable consequences , given a fixed set of resources , or ( b ) minimizes the cost in order to achieve a desired outcome . in the context of health policy , cea is usually employed to compare alternative courses of action that result in similar health benefits , in order to compare which is the most cost-effective . the results of a cea feed into the macro-allocation issues of priority setting in health care . genetics/genomics research and public health : common chronic diseases of adult life are responsible for a high proportion of the public health burden worldwide . it can confidently be stated that most common chronic diseases have a genetic component , conferred by variant versions of many genes , each one with small causal effect . their occurrence is the result of complex environment gene interaction . this concept includes infectious diseases , where variations in the human genome may explain differences in clinical responses to the infectious agent . the main role of genetics/genomics thus far is in the development of much better genetically-based diagnostic tools for many diseases with a discernible genetic component . similarly , genetics/genomics is playing an increasing role in the diagnosis of infections , as tools are developed to identify infectious agents by their dna footprints . furthermore , there is the potential of pinpointing the genetic predispositions for common diseases like coronary arteriosclerosis , some types of cancer , some types of dementia , diabetes and hypertension , among others . this assertion , however , does not deny that environmental factors ( exposure to mutagens and other toxics and teratogens , smoking , unhealthy diet , lack of physical exercise , stress , etc . ) are , and will continue to be , the major factors in disease expression , even for some conditions classically considered genetic ( like sickle cell disease or cystic fibrosis ) . prevention and treatment of diseases , in which genes play a significant role ( particularly in common adult diseases ) rely , and will continue to rely , on the control of adverse environmental factors . this realization is essential to avoid reductionist approaches to the prevention and control of conditions of public health significance that have a genetic component in their causation . nevertheless , and given that common conditions with a genetic component contribute heavily to the global burden of disease , it is logical to expect that genetics and genomics will have a significant role to play in their prevention and control in public health , both in developed and developing nations . genomic research and epidemiology : epidemiology as a discipline is at the scientific core of public health , involved primarily in studying the distribution and determinants of health-related states or events in populations and the application of these studies to control health problems . epidemiology is concerned with determining the risk factors for diseases , identifying those at highest risk , and evaluating the effectiveness of health interventions . in turn , genomics is concerned with determining the effect of variations in the human genome on the risk of disease . thus , the two disciplines blend in the field of genomic epidemiology , which studies how genetic factors influence the occurrence of disease in populations and families . a related field is molecular epidemiology , which looks at the occurrence of disease through the study of biological markers of exposures , susceptibilities and effects . the fields of genomic epidemiology and molecular epidemiology rely increasingly on high technology tools such as dna microarrays and gene expression profiles . these techniques enable the study of thousands of genes simultaneously , in order to determine the effects of gene variations on disease as well as the effects of environmental factors on the genome and its expression . epidemiological methods are essential to quantify the impact of gene variants on the risk of disease and its phenotypic manifestations and to measure the effect of environmental risk factors that interact with gene variants to cause disease . further , epidemiology is the appropriate tool to assess the clinical validity of new genetic tests ( often this does not occur and tests are put on the market with inadequate proof of their validity in predicting the risk of disease ) . finally , epidemiological methods permit the monitoring of genetic test utilization in the population and of the effects of genetic knowledge on the health of different populations . the role of genome epidemiology is thus to : use genetic variants routinely in the study of gene environment interactions in disease ; use biological markers of exposure , susceptibility and outcomes ; evaluate allelic variants in relation to health outcomes ; evaluate genes as disease risk factors to provide a basis for assessing clinical validity of genetic tests for disease susceptibility . in sum , genomic epidemiology can determine the scientific validity of purported gene disease associations . genetics and genomics research applied to health care some of the key objectives of current genetics/ genomics research applied to health care are to identify : human genome variants associated with susceptibility to common non-communi-cable diseases ; human genome variants associated with immune responses to infectious agents , which may influence individual susceptibility or resistance to infections or deter- mine abnormal responses which may lead to chronic autoimmune diseases ; and human genome variants involved in the metabolic pathways of drugs and medications , which may explain individual variations in the responses to these agents ( pharmacogenomics ) . as useful as such research may prove to be in providing new means of preventing , diagnosing and treating diseases , some public experts are concerned that excessive emphasis on unproven genomic approaches to disease prevention may divert scarce resources from generally applicable public health measures ( promotion of good diet , regular exercise , smoking cessation , etc . ) which in spite of being well proven are not fully applied , particularly in developing countries . additionally , it is unclear whether genomic research will lead to improved approaches for disease prevention and health promotion at the population level . this research requires genetic screening and testing of individuals , families and populations to uncover the role of genomic variations in health and disease . genetic epidemiology enables a scientific assessment of the real validity of genetic screening and testing in disease prevention and health promotion . conclusion : compared with developed nations , developing countries are burdened by high levels of poverty and structural deficiencies ; and their resources to combat disease and promote health are scarce . disease profiles in these countries are characterized by a higher proportion of nutritional , infectious and social conditions leading to ill health and death . superimposed on this reality , there is an increasing visibility of diseases traditionally associated with developed countries ( namely , congenital conditions and non-communicable diseases ) . facing this hard reality , developing countries must carefully assess their disease burden , set their priorities and use their scarce health budgets wisely , making sure that the prevention and care of genetic and congenital conditions is not neglected and finds an appropriate place among other health priorities . a number of who-convened advisory groups have articulated the criteria for applying genetics and genomics to the health problems of developing countries . the following are the main recommendations for developing countries resulting from the who/hgn/waobdp meeting of experts convened . need to recognize the burden imposed by genetic disorders and birth defects . need for political will and commitment to support the implementation of genetic services . improve epidemiological knowledge about genetic disorders and birth defects . define the goals of genetic services in terms of both individual/family well-being and public health . improve prenatal and perinatal services . organize genetic services in a comprehensive and integrated manner , with roots in the primary health care level . select programmes and targets according to prevalence , severity and predicted outcomes . respect ethical principles and cultural diversity . train health professionals in medical genetics . educate the public in genetics . encourage the formation of parent/patient organizations . discussion : ethical , legal and social issues : medical genetics is the field of medicine most centrally involved in providing services to people with genetic disorders and to their families . as defined by who consultants , the goals of medical genetic services are : to help people with a genetic disadvantage and their families to live and re-produce as normally as possible , to make informed choices in reproductive and health matters , to assist people in obtaining access to relevant medical services ( diagnostic , therapeutic , rehabilitative or preventive ) or social support systems , to help them adapt to their unique situation , and to become informed on new relevant developments . medical genetic services include services that encompass all or most aspects of genetic testing , from genetic screening , to referral for testing , through to testing , post-test counselling and treatment . there are a number of ways in which genetic information is considered to be different from other health information , although the degree and impact of these differences remain under discussion . for example : ( a ) genetic information may have medical and social implications for an entire family , rather than only the affected individual ; ( b ) genetic discoveries may be predictive of future adverse health events for an individual or family member who is currently unaffected ; and ( c ) genetic information and the choices made in the present may affect future generations . these features of genetic information generate specific ethical considerations , particularly concerning the implementation of medical genetic services . ethics is a field of philosophy concerned with articulating moral values and rules for action , and with analyzing and resolving conflicts among these values and rules . bioethics is the study of ethical , social , legal , philosophical and other related issues arising in health care and the biological sciences . the following four principles , outlined in the who 2001 review of ethical issues in medical genetics , are widely accepted as philosophical tenets of bioethics : justice : treating persons and groups equitably , and distributing benefits and burdens of health care as fairly as possible in society . autonomy : respecting the self-determination of individuals and protecting those persons with diminished autonomy . beneficence : giving highest priority to the welfare of persons and maximizing benefits to their health . non-maleficence : avoiding and preventing harm to persons or , at least , minimizing harm . the ethical issues arising in relation to genetic testing and screening in developing countries can not be readily compartmentalized according to these principles , because the issues often involve questions relating to more than one principle . throughout the report we will highlight the impact of certain social , medical and legal practices on the realization of these principles . introduction : achieving justice is the primary ethical issue in relation to the development of medical genetic services in developing countries . justice involves : ( a ) balancing genetic services against other population health needs , and ( b ) equitable and safe access to genetic services once they have been introduced . from this theoretical platform , this section moves to some of the relevant features of the social context common to a number of developing countries , which affect the implementation of medical genetic services in health care . for example , because reproduction predominantly occurs within marriage , marriage structures and preferences ( for example consanguineous marriage ) can affect the rate of expression of recessive genetic diseases , and can conversely provide opportunities ( for example , arranged marriage ) for screening , testing and counselling . religion can affect the acceptability of certain services associated with genetic testing , namely termination of pregnancy . abortion for medical reasons is a controversial issue ; this section examines where and under what circumstances it is legally permitted ; and look at the problem of unsafe abortions , particularly in countries where abortion is illegal . gender is another relevant feature of the social context because traditional gender roles and gender inequality can affect reproductive decisions and patterns of discrimination within a community . the combination of genetic screening , arranged marriage and gender inequality generates a specific concern about the stigmatization of female carriers of genetic diseases and the potential for discrimination in marriage because the process of formal marriage introductions presents opportunities to exclude these female carriers . the report considers different examples of community-specific responses to this concern . an important tool in preventing discrimination and stigmatization more generally is the protection of patients privacy and confidentiality . we look at the relevant regulations introduced in some developing countries to protect medical , and specifically genetic , information . further tool to prevent discrimination and stigmatization is public education . genetic information can be complex and difficult to understand , and as discussed above , it can have special implications for the patients future health , for the health of their children , and for other family members . for these reasons , patient and public education and engagement are essential components of medical genetic services . genetic testing and screening should be supported by public education , and genetic counselling should be made available to patients and communities . to effectively integrate medical genetic services into public health more generally , primary health care providers such as physicians and nurses need to be able to recognize those at risk of genetic conditions , be aware of the genetic services available , and refer patients to the appropriate facilities . this section finishes with a discussion of patient safety and well-being . in a sense , patient well-being encompasses many of the topics discussed previously , as all aim to reduce or prevent harm to patients and their families ( non-maleficence ) and benefit patients ( beneficence ) . however , this subsection looks specifically at quality assurance mechanisms in place in developing countries and the implications of commercial genetic testing for patient safety and well-being . the topics covered in this report do not form an exhaustive analysis of all of the elsi of medical genetic services . rather , the report highlights some of the more significant ethical challenges faced by those developing countries that are establishing genetic services , giving priority to topics not comprehensively covered in previous reports . similarly , the examples included do not cover all countries . the report as a whole provides examples from a selection of different countries and regions.as is widely acknowledged , epidemiological and project evaluation data are lacking for many developing countries ; the range of the countries covered in the report has been constrained by the examples available in the literature . to help provide an up-to-date picture of the ethical issues currently associated with genetic services in developing countries , the report includes five case studies based on background papers commissioned specifically for the report from geneticists working in developing countries . each case study highlights a primary concept covered in the report ; but also encompass a wide range of other ethical , legal and social issues in the context of that country . justice todays global health situation raises urgent questions about justice . in some parts of the world there is a continued expectation of longer and more comfortable life , while in many others there is despair over the failure to control dis-ease although the means to do so exist . the issue of equitable access to genetic services must be considered against the backdrop of existing global health inequalities . the benefits of modern medicine have still not reached many parts of the developing world . as noted in the introduction , many developing countries now suffer the double burden of infectious disease and malnutrition in combination with increasing rates of chronic disease . the vast majority of global research funds are spent on diseases that account for only a small proportion of the global disease burden . the term the 10/90 gap refers to the fact that less than 10 % of the worldwide expenditure on health research and development is devoted to the major health problems of 90 % of the population.in the context of such large and steadily increasing global health inequalities , there is significant concern that health benefits drawn from future developments in genomics and genetics will not be shared with the developing world , in 1985 , a who advisory group on hereditary diseases concluded that the broadest of the real ethical issues is the limited availability of genetic services . as a result , women bear seriously affected children , and the situation is exacerbated by the realization that it could have been avoided . justice is one of the four foundational bioethical principles . the concept of justice relies on the idea of fair and equitable treatment in light of what persons are owed or entitled to . equity can be understood as the state of being just , impartial and fair . formal justice demands that equals be treated equally and unequal ’ s be treated differently . the principle of formal justice disallows arbitrary , unjustified distinctions between things or people who should be considered equal . as is discussed in more detail below , the failure to weigh fairly the need for medical genetic services against other health services is a breach of the formal principle of justice . medical genetic services may be rejected because of the erroneous assumption that they are always complex and expensive . policy-makers have a duty to consider the growing evidence regarding the cost-effectiveness of medical genetic services in developing countries . for the purposes of this discussion , we use the term justice to refer to distributive justice , defined as the fair , equitable and appropriate distribution of benefits and burdens within a society . benefits and burdens can be interpreted very broadly , including : rights and obligations ; opportunities and barriers ; and access or restriction to resources ( including services , facilities , money and taxation , among others ) . questions of justice are exacerbated by conditions of scarcity , where the resources required to meet essential needs must be divided fairly between competing demands . considerations of justice , in the context of medical services , cover the macro-allocation issues of which medical services and goods should be provided , and micro-allocation questions of who should have access to these services and on what basis . the allocation of health resources should maximize the benefits from limited resources and distribute those benefits fairly . challenges it is important to note that , in some cases , the neglect and underutilization of genetic testing and screening options is an ethical failure . to ignore the evidence of the burden of congenital disorders , or any other demonstrable health burden , and to rely on the false assumption that genetic services are always sophisticated and demanding , is to fail to adhere to the principle of distributive justice . evidence regarding the control of congenital anomalies should be compared to the evidence for competing health priorities . failure to do this results in harm occurring that could have been prevented . in turn , failing to prevent avoidable harm breaches : ( a ) the principle of non-maleficence and ( b ) the principle of distributive justice , because it distributes health care burdens unfairly within the community . case study 1 : newborn screening in brazil ( 2001-ongoing ) . in brazil , there are no dedicated governmental programmes for the prevention , diagnosis , registration , or treatment of the majority of genetic diseases . since 1992 , however , the public single health system sistema nico de sade , suswas responsible for neonatal screening to diagnose phenylketonuria and hypothyroidism . however , its provision of screening services varied by region and did not include facilities for diagnostic confirmation , clinical evaluation , treatment , family education or genetic counselling.in response to these limitations , in 2001 the ministry of health established the national newborn screening program programa nacional de triagem neonatal , pntn . in 2002 , 65 % of all newborns were screened . the brazilian government has made a commitment to providing resources for the early diagnosis , treatment and follow-up for disorders caused by inborn errors of metabolism . the ministry of health is currently focused on the goal of 100 % newborn screening . data from 2003 indicated that the total cost of the pntn was u $ 15.2 million and the total number of newborns screened was estimated to be 2 360 960 , which equates to approximately u $ 6.4 per newborn screened . description of the project the pntns specific aims are to ensure equitable access to genetic screening for all brazilian newborns ; reduce morbidity and mortality as a result of genetic diseases ; organize state screening networks ; ensure therapy and follow-up for each disorder detected ; provide guidelines to standardize regional services ; and create and support a national newborn screening database to collect epidemiological data . the pntn has been operating nationally since 2001 and is run by municipal and state health offices under the guidance of the ministry of health . technical team was established to develop , evaluate and assess quality and safety standards . as a result of cooperation between the three governmental levels , the pntn has organized the state screening network in 24 states , and the federal district . the state screening network includes collecting stations in all municipalities that have maternity hospital , which must be under the control of reference services ( no less than one per state ) . maternity hospital , which must be under the control of reference services ( no less than one per state ) . the pntn was implemented in three stages due to existing regional inequalities in health care structure : stage 1 , testing for hypothyroidism and phenylketonuria , for which testing is legally compulsory and is available in all 24 states of brazil , and the federal district ; stage 2 , testing for hemoglobin diseases , for which 13 states are now capable of screening ; stage 3 , testing for cystic fibrosis , which is available in the 3 states with the most developed screening structures already in place . a prerequisite for transition from stage 2 to stage 3 is the demonstration of 70 % screening coverage of newborns in the state for stage 1 and 2 conditions . a state wishing to transition must also show epidemiological data justifying the need for stage 3 screening . each state must have at least one reference service , a centre that identifies conditions for diagnosis , treatment , follow-up and genetic counselling . reference services are in charge of collecting and managing samples , and receiving and registering patients ; and they are also responsible for integrating services with the health assistance network to ensure general health support . each service must minimally consist of a pediatrician , an endocrinologist , a nutritionist , a psychologist and a social worker . the inclusion of a clinical geneticist is officially recommended , although not compulsory , due to the lack of clinical geneticists in some regions . challenges : after almost four years , initial evaluations show that the pntn has been successful in some regions . however , many regional public health care services are not able to fulfil all the programme requirements . after the implementation of the programme in 23 states , almost half of the teams did not have enough experience in newborn screening , and two-thirds did not include a member with any training in , understanding of , genetic counselling . the state screening network has designed a training programme to ensure that all teams have appropriately trained staff to fill each of the required roles . states with few or no genetic , clinical or laboratory facilities have found it financially challenging to meet the requirements of the programme . clinical protocols and therapeutic guidelines are being developed to standardize the delivery of services , and the ministry of health is providing financial support for buying and distributing medications and dietary supplements to support treatment . finally , the process of coordinating all levels of government vertically ( national , state and local ) and horizontally ( across a developing country the size of brazil ) has been politically challenging . in response , the ministry of health technical team is engaged in a national campaign to ensure the involvement and support of state and local public health officials . clinical protocols and therapeutic guidelines are also being developed to standardize the delivery of services . ethical , legal and social issues raised by the project : there are still challenges in the oversight and standardization of genetics services in brazil , and a specific concern is the shortage of clinical geneticists . further , there is no official system of genetic counselling in brazil and the current resources of newborn screening teams do not allow for regular genetic counselling . the pntn procedures do not include an informed consent process , and parents are often informed about newborn screening shortly after the birth and without sufficient information about the scope of screening or the potential social and medical consequences . identification of misassigned paternity is not uncommon during newborn screening and is sometimes handled im-properly . stigmatization , genetic discrimination , and breaches of privacy have occurred , particularly in relation to the detection of sickle cell carriers . there has been controversy among physicians , health care workers , sickle cell disease associations and african descendants associations over how best to handle information on individuals who are carriers for sickle cell disease . samples are collected and stored ; however , there are no specific rules regarding their use in the future and it ap-pears that their privacy is not always adequately protected . the federal district refers to the brazilian capital , which has the status of a state . brazil therefore has 27 federal units consisting of 26 states and one federal district . cost-effectiveness : an issue that is specific to genetic conditions in developing countries is the persisting misconception that medical genetic services depend on sophisticated , expensive technologies unsuited to the developing world context . we will therefore present some of the evidence that demonstrates medical genetic services can be cost-effective in developing countries . cost-effectiveness is analyzed in two ways . prospective analysis of cost-effectiveness is applied where there is no programme in place , but the efficacy of such a programme is predicted from known data . the difficulty with such analysis is that much of the data used is only an estimate , for example of the anticipated rate of uptake of screening , or the expected rate of termination of identified affected fetuses . in some countries , the cost of lifetime treatment for the genetic condition in question has never been measured , and therefore an estimate is again used . the preferable alternatives retrospective analysis , where a programme is analyzed after either the full programme or a pilot programme has been implemented and data generated and collected . in practice , both types of analysis are used : prospective , to argue for the implementation of a trial or pilot programme ; and retrospective , to argue for the expansion and continuation of the programme . country example 1 cost-effectiveness analysis of fragile x screening in israel : a prospective analysis of a proposed fragile x ( an x- linked genetic syndrome that is a leading identifiable cause of mental retardation ) carrier screening programme in israel was based on four figures : ( 1 ) data regarding the prevalence of fragile x syndrome in families with no history of fragile x or mental retardation ( 1 women in 113 is estimated to be a pre-mutation carrier ) ; ( 2 ) the cost of lifetime care for an individual with mental retardation , estimated at us $ 680 000 ; ( 3 ) an estimated 50 % acceptance rate of the screening programme ; and ( 4 ) an estimated 100 % termination of affected pregnancies . estimates were based on data from israel and/or the netherlands . ( for example the actual cost of lifetime care for mental retardation in israel is not known and estimates were based on the cost of care in the netherlands similar in size and with a comparable system of social medicine to israel . these estimates were adjusted relative to the respective gdps of the two countries . ) these estimates showed that the expected net benefit of running a fragile x screening programme in israel is a saving of approximately us $ 5.5 million per annum . this preliminary analysis shows that a programme for fragile x screening should be cost-effective in israel . the establishment of a pilot screening programme would provide an opportunity to collect specific israeli data to better estimate cost-effectiveness on a national scale . country example 3 : cost-effectiveness analysis of family-based ( cascade ) screening in pakistan targeting extended families for screening is an efficient model of genetic screening in communities where there are high rates of consanguineous marriage . one study of cascade screening for haemoglobin disorders in pakistan demonstrated that extended family screening can yield a large amount of useful information about carriers and couples at risk . all identified carriers in this study reported having used the information provided to them during the genetic counselling and testing process for family planning purposes . although family-based screening involves considerable labour in terms of collecting family medical information , it can identify a subpopulation who are at risk for the disorder , and thus avoids the need to screen much larger populations . it thus excludes some individuals from unnecessary testing , which can conserve the limited resources of developing countries . labour costs are relative to a country ’ s resources and are therefore comparatively low in developing countries . in-stead , it is the cost of reagents that is the primary financial barrier to screening for many developing countries . the labor-intensive aspect of cascade screening may therefore not be a serious cost concern . as a result , cascade screening , which places higher demands on staff time but lower demands on the use of reagents ( the re-verse of population screening ) , presents a cost-effective alternative for many developing countries . family-based screening can also be more effective , as it decreases the likelihood that affected individuals will be missed . in addition , family-based screening overcome some of the barriers present in population screening that result from limited public education about genetic disorders , because family members have often had personal contact with someone with the disease ( 4 ) .country example 2 cost-effectiveness analysis of thalassemia screening in hongkong sar , china the prenatal screening programme for a thalassaemia and -thalassaemia in hongkong sarwas retrospectively analysed for cost-effectiveness in 2004. since 1995 , universal prenatal screening for thalassaemia has been offered at tsan yuk hospital . over the course of the programme , 18 of 19 affected fetuses were terminated , representing a 95 % preference for termination . the total cost of the programme to date ( hk $ 10 million ) was far less than the expected postnatal service cost for 18 individuals with -thalassaemia ( hk $ 40.4 million ) . the post- natal service cost was based on the cost of managing a patient with -thalassaemia major for 45 years , including bone marrow transplant/cord blood stem cell trans-plant , which equates to hk $ 2.7 million per patient . it was concluded that the programme was cost-effective due to the high prevalence of thalassaemia in the area . the following example of family-based screening in pakistan ( country example 3 ) illustrates how different social contexts can vary the outcome of a cea in relation to specific genetic services . ethical issues cea assumes a consequentialist moral standard . consequentialism ( one form of which is utilitarianism ) is a moral theory that advocates only one basic principle of ethics : to maximize benefits and minimize harm . most ethical criticisms of cea stem from critiques of consequentialist moral theory generally , and include questions about : ( a ) the construction of cea in health care : such as , whose values should be used to define the desirable outcomes ( for example , comparing impaired functions with shortened lives or no life at all ) ? ( b ) questions of distributive justice in the use of cea in a priority setting : such as , when should small benefits to a large number of persons be prioritized over large benefits to a small number of persons ( for example : where rare genetic conditions cause severe suffering and hard- ship within a limited number of affected families ) ? attempting to maximize the health outcomes of a society as a whole , with limited resources , necessarily involves deciding between the health services required by one group and the health services required by another , whether these groups are defined geographically or in terms of health needs . as illustrated by the brazilian newborn screening programme , distributing scarce resources equitably and in a cost-effective manner can be very challenging . should medical genetic services be located in urban centres where they reach the most people or distributed throughout the country so that families in rural communities also have access to the services ? locating services in urban centres is likely to improve the health outcomes of the population as a whole , but it is also likely to widen the gap between the health outcomes of urban and rural communities . this example demonstrates the tension between cost-effectiveness and health maximization on the one hand , and the principle of equity on the other . cea of prenatal testing and screening one issue relevant to prenatal genetic screening the evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of this kind of medical service . necessarily such screening has to evaluate the costs and benefits of early detection of serious genetic and/or congenital disorders . there are moral implications in choosing whether to evaluate programmes involving prenatal diagnosis in terms of parents opportunity to make an informed decision , including the decision to end an affected pregnancy . a key controversy in this debate is how if at all to value lives . for instance , it can be argued that evaluating prevention of disease or disability involves evaluating a prenatal decision that the quality of life of a ( future ) person would be worse than non-existence . aside from the difficult technical problems involved in making this comparison , many people are uncomfortable with the conceptual problems involved in the tangled process of evaluating burden of disease , when entwined with evaluating the value of a life . conclusion : cost-effectiveness analysis can play an important role in macro-allocation decisions , but these data must be weighed against issues of equity and access . the brazilian newborn screening programme demonstrated that achieving a balance between cost-effectiveness and equitable access can be difficult . the ethical debate surrounding the rationing of scare health care resources , and cea in particular , is complex and in many cases far from resolution however three points can be made : evidence relating to the cost-effectiveness of interventions should play an important role in health resource prioritization . intent of finding the least costly way to deliver effective care and maximize health outcomes can be congruent with the principle of distributive justice , and represents an important technique for health care systems with limited resources . however , the health policy process must consider not only the impact of different policies on health expenditure and population health outcomes , but also the distribution of improved health outcomes be-tween different groups . 3. in the absence of consensus , a fair process for determining a legitimate distribution of health care resources is necessary . a list of the elements of fair process is available in appendix c. the fair process model mirrors many of the elements of effective genetic testing and screening services that will be raised throughout the report : community consultation and education ; active dialogue with relevant stakeholders ; and ongoing responsiveness to community needs . social context : this section will take a more in-depth look at the features of the social context in some developing countries that affect both the need for genetic testing and screening services , and the acceptance and use of these services in specific communities . the elements of the social context discussed include traditional cultural patterns of marriage ; religion ; the legality of , and access to , safe abortion ; and gender issues . the purpose of this section is not to discuss the features of the social context as barriers that must be overcome before genetic services can be implemented ; rather it is to illustrate the framework within which genetic services should be developed . with cooperation between cultural , religious and political leaders , and in full consideration of the social context , genetic services can be developed that are applicable and effective within different social contexts . it is important not to simply transfer systems for delivering genetic services established in developed countries to contexts in developing countries where they may not be appropriate . marriage : cultural traditions such as consanguineous and endogamous marriage can have an impact on the prevalence of recessive genetic diseases within a community , and therefore affect the need for genetic services such as testing and screening . further way in which marriage norms can impinge on genetic services is the process of arranged marriage , which can affect the culturally appropriate time to conduct carrier screening . some communities may use social constructions of kinship in addition to biological constructions , for example , referring to someone as uncle when they are neither a genetic relative nor a member of the extended family by marriage . this can have an impact on genetic counselling , highlighting the importance that counsellors have the ability to understand the social circumstances of the clients , including for example the distinction between social and biological concepts of relatedness . social concepts can likewise affect the family ’ s understanding of genetic inheritance . consanguinity and concepts of relatedness should be viewed as an integral part of the social and cultural framework within which genetic services must work . consanguineous marriage : consanguineous kinship is characterized by the sharing of common ancestors . the word is derived from the latin com sanguineus , of common blood . two or more individuals are said to be consanguineous if they have a common recent ancestor ( usually not further back than three or four generations ) . in clinical genetics , a consanguineous marriage is most typically defined as occurring between a couple related as second cousin or closer ( resulting in a coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) in the progeny of f is equal to 0.0156 ) . the coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) measures the probability that a person with two identical alleles of the same gene received both alleles from a common ancestor . f is therefore determined by the genetic relationship between the parents , and what proportion of their genetic material is shared . consanguineous marriage is practiced for cultural and economic reasons that vary among communities . however , motivations that arecommon among consanguineous communities include strengthening family ties and the maintenance of family property , especially landholdings ; reduced requirement for dowry ; and the belief that the bride will enjoy a more harmonious relationship with her in-laws . relationship between consanguineous marriage and genetic diseases most people carry a number of recessive disease alleles but , because they are rare in the general population , there is a very low chance of two carriers reproducing and producing affected offspring . consanguineous marriage is associated with an increased prevalence of recessive genetic diseases and infant mortality . when close relatives mate , the chance that both will carry the same recessive allele for a trait is higher , and therefore they are more likely to have a child who is homozygous for that trait . however , it is important to recognize that most recessive characteristics are harmless ; only a minority are associated with major diseases . consanguinity in and of itself does not cause disease ; it only increases the chance that reproduction will occur between two carriers for the same recessive genetic conditions . the recognition that recessive conditions occur at a higher rate in consanguineous communities can facilitate the early identification of carriers and carrier couples ( as discussed in country example 3 on family-based screening in pakistan ) . carrier couples in a randomly mating population are often only identified after the birth of an affected child . however , in a consanguineous community extended family studies can make the identification of carrier couples much simpler . early identification of carrier couples allows for premarital or preconception counselling and the avoidance of affected births . it is not possible to provide data regarding the absolute risk associated with consanguinity because the risk depends on the prevalence of recessive alleles in the particular community , i.e . the background community risk . the only meaningful data therefore is the risk relative to non-consanguineous couples in the same community . available data regarding the impact of consanguineous relationships on the prevalence of recessive genetic conditions indicate that this risk varies considerably both between communities and at the individual family level . empirical studies involving the progeny of first cousins have indicated that morbidity levels are between 0.7 % and 7.5 % higher than in the offspring of unrelated couples . on average worldwide there is about a 4-5 % increase in the risk of premature mortality among the offspring of first cousin unions . available data demonstrate that with each 0.01 increase in the coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) , the birth prevalence of infants with recessively inherited diseases increases by about 7/1000 . prevalence of consanguinity : many communities in north and sub-saharan africa , the middle east and west , central and south asia exhibit a strong cultural preference for consanguineous marriage . even in regions and countries where consanguinity is common , there is a wide variation between subgroups . pakistan , for example , has very high levels of consanguinity : a national study in the early 1990s found an average rate of 62 % . however smaller surveys of subpopulations have indicated rates of 30-76 % . saudi culture also exhibits a strong preference for consanguineous marriage : the current average rate in saudi arabia is 58 % ; but this varies by region from a low of 34 % to a high of 80 % . in jordan the frequency of consanguineous marriage ranges from 50-66 % . in the kingdom of bahrain , the rate of consanguinity in 1995 was 39 % , although from 46 % consanguinity in the previous generation . the size of the potential marriage pool may affect the observed levels of consanguineous marriage in the population . in small communities , prospective non-consanguineous pairings may be limited . as a result , the prevalence of consanguineous marriages may be elevated irrespective of the cultural and social preferences for consanguinity . although there is a preference for consanguineous marriage in many countries , in others , marriage between close relatives is legislatively prohibited . under chinese law , for example , marriage is generally prohibited between relatives of first and second degrees of kinship , which includes first cousin marriages and uncle/niece and aunt/nephew marriages . however , first cousin unions in china may be permissible for members of communities that traditionally have practiced consanguinity . the hindu marriage act in india bans uncle/niece marriage , but a study of marriage patterns in parts of southern india revealed that more than 21 % of hindu marriages were between uncles and nieces . under islamic law , uncle/niece marriages are banned , although double first cousin marriages are permitted . this distinction is interesting from abiological perspective because these pairings haveidentical coefficients of inbreeding , f is equal to 0.125. while consanguinity influences the prevalence of recessive genetic conditions , it should not be assumed that this is always the major risk factor within consanguineous communities . in a study of the first 500 people to attend the 1993-1994 premarital thalassaemia screening programme in the kingdom of bahrain , only 15.4 % of carrier-carrier couples were consanguineous ( as compared to a 25.9 % rate of consanguinity in the total study group ) ; therefore trying to discourage consanguineous pairings through premarital counselling would not alone be sufficient to decrease the overall rate of affected births in the community . preference for consanguineous marriage is a feature of the socio-cultural context within which medical genetic services must work . to summarize , consanguinity is a risk factor for hereditary genetic conditions ; however , there are many variables associated with the impact of consanguinity , such as the preference for consanguinity within subpopulations , the degree of consanguinity , and the prevalence of recessive disease alleles in the population . consanguineous marriage should not be discouraged ; instead , voluntary premarital screening to identify carrier couples should be offered to consanguineous communities , in combination with services for prenatal diagnosis and selective abortion of affected fetuses . endogamous marriage : endogamous marriage refers to marriage within a specific group , such as a tribe or clan , as required by custom or law . in india , pakistan and bangladesh , which collectively account for more than 20 % of the worlds population , marriage continues to be arranged within caste and biraderi boundaries that probably date back some 3000 years . there are an estimated 50 , 000 to 60 , 000 separate endogamous communities in india alone.in effect , each of these groupings form separate breeding pools . among muslims in pakistan , endogamous marriage requires matching ethnic and tribal affiliations and at times social stratification based on familial occupation . according to hussain , the strong preference for endogamous and/or consanguineous marriages is driven by multiple factors , including the pride associated with staying within the bounds of biraderi or social group identity , and the ease of arranging marriages within the family . in addition to consanguineous unions , a 1994 study in pakistan showed that a further 38 % of marriages had been contracted within biraderis . patterns of endogamous marriage also result in higher rates of expression of autosomal recessive diseases . the net effect of endogamous marriage is that disease mutations that have arisen recently maybe restricted or even unique to individual ethnic groups , sub-castes , tribes or clans . in general , the less common a disorder , the greater the influence of consanguinity on its prevalence . this applies to both monogenic diseases and multifactorial disorders . for this reason , many genetic diseases have been first diagnosed in highly endogamous communities . in cultures where consanguineous and endogamous marriages are favored , premarital genetic screening can be an effective strategy to increase the reproductive choice of couples and reduce the birth of affected children . this approach is discussed more thoroughly in the section of the report addressing arranged marriages . religion : religious views may have an influence on understanding of , and attitudes towards , the nature of genetic disorders , and their diagnosis and treatment . in particular , they may affect an individuals reproductive decision-making . appreciating the prevailing beliefs in a local community is critical to achieving effective health care . such understanding is necessary to ensure that information is imparted to individuals sensitively and in a way that facilitates understanding . the success of testing and screening programmes rests in part on their acceptance by the religious and wider community . one 1995 study of sickle cell disease in nigeria found that although the majority of carriers and affected individuals surveyed understood how the disorder was passed on , as many as 8 % of carrier fathers and 30 % of carrier mothers believed that the disorder was an act of god . similar studies were conducted in saudi arabia among parents of children with a range of genetic diseases , who were interviewed about their understanding of the cause of the disorder . all parents interviewed believed that god determined their health status , granting either health or illness.at least half understood the inherited basis of genetic diseases ; nevertheless , many of them rejected it , citing instead religious explanations for the cause of disease . as one respondent stated : the disease runs in my family but only god knows why some children are fine and others are not . this did not prevent parents from seeking those treatments permitted by islamic beliefs , demonstrating that religious views about disease causation and secular scientific explanations of heredity are not necessarily mutually exclusive . religious beliefs may affect attitudes to medical genetic services , particularly selective abortion for fetal abnormalities , and , by association , prenatal diagnosis . while many religions do not prohibit termination of pregnancy for medical reasons , provided termination can be performed early on in pregnancy ( 16 ) , in some countries religious beliefs will preclude the abortion of fetuses diagnosed with a genetic disorder ( 221 ; 112 ) . for many couples this will exclude abortion as an option following prenatal diagnosis . where anti-abortion views are prevalent , it is important to provide public education about the range of relevant reproductive choices available ( including premarital screening , partner selection , adoption and the option not to have children ) . these educational activities must be sensitive to gender norms about discussing reproductive choice , particularly the socially acceptable ways in which women are permitted to participate , in order to present information in a manner that maximizes accessibility for , and encourages active participation of , both women and men . in many countries , the timing and rationale for abortions may be determined in accordance with religious teaching . in 1990 the islamic jurisprudence council of the islamic world league issued a fatwa that allowed abortion in the first 120 days following conception : if the fetus was proven beyond doubt to be affected with a severe malformation not amenable to therapy ; if born , there would follow a life of misery for the individual and his/her family ; and if both parents consented . this example demonstrates the potential for religious teaching to accommodate and respond to new scientific developments and research . religious belief plays an important part in many peoples lives , particularly in relation to marriage , reproduction and views on life and death , and can therefore have a significant impact on the way genetic services are implemented within a particular community . dialogue and cooperation between religious leaders , policy-makers and scientists must be encouraged in order to ensure that genetic services are implemented in a manner that is culturally acceptable and maximizes the health benefits to patients and families . termination of affected pregnancy : at present , there are many congenital disorders that are not open to effective management , for example trisomy 18 ( edwards syndrome ) , trisomy 13 ( patau syndrome ) , tay sachs disease and anencephaly . the number of conditions falling into this category is greater in developing countries , where treatment options are further restricted due to limited resources . for example , the condition phenylketonuria requires a highly specialized and expensive diet for approximately the first 16 years of life as well as during the female patients own pregnancies . although this diet is accessible to many of the affected individuals in developed countries , the cost can be prohibitive for affected persons in developing countries . attitudes towards termination of pregnancy are relevant in the context of genetic testing and screening because abortion of fetuses affected by disorders that can not be effectively managed within the local socioeconomic context is one preventive option . this report uses the terms abortion and termination of pregnancy to refer to the deliberate interruption of pregnancy following the detection of fetal abnormality ( unless otherwise noted ) . ( the discussion of unsafe abortion is one such exception . ) unless otherwise specified , reference to abortion as an option for individuals and couples , following prenatal diagnosis , assumes that this procedure is not legally prohibited in the country concerned . contrary to popular belief , a large proportion of developing countries do permit abortions when medically indicated . at present , such services are available in china , cyprus , india , the islamic republic of iran , south africa , some south-east asian countries including cambodia and a minority of latin american and caribbean countries , among others . data on abortion rates ( the number of abortions per 1000 women aged 1544 years ) are not available for all countries ; the known rates for the countries listed above demonstrates the significant differences within countries where abortion is legal : china,26.1 ; cuba , 77.7 ; india , 2.7 ; south africa , 2.7 ; and tunisia , . the specific circumstances under which an abortion is legal vary by country . for example , under ecuadorian regulations , termination of pregnancy is available where the fetus has been diagnosed with a genetic disorder and the termination is approved by both a gynecologist a geneticist . termination for thalassaemia is accepted in saudi arabia and pakistan up to 17 weeks into pregnancy , in line with the islamic fatwa discussed above . in pakistan , prenatal diagnosis in the first trimester and consequent termination of affected pregnancies is widely endorsed : research shows that 89 % of couples who have a fetus affected with thalassaemia chose to terminate the pregnancy . in many developing countries , however , medical abortions remain illegal . for example , termination of pregnancy is prohibited in most countries in latin america and the caribbean , except for cuba , ecuador and isolated jurisdictions such as mexico city . termination under any circumstances is prohibited by law in chile . termination is technically illegal in brazil , except where the pregnancy is the result of rape or will endanger the life of the mother if allowed to continue . according to horovitz et al. , however , brazilian courts have allowed termination where the fetus suffers from severe abnormalities that are incompatible with survival outside the womb . termination is prohibited in jordan unless continuation of the pregnancy dangers the mothers life . full listings of the countries where abortion is legal , and under what circumstances , are available from the united nations population division department of economic and social affairs . the statistics in box 4 demonstrate the breadth of reasons for which a pregnancy might be terminated , and how widely each is legally permitted . thirty-nine percent of countries allow abortion for fetal impairment , although their definitions of what constitutes an impairment will differ . these differing definitions sit within the context of the broader question of how communities define ill health and impairment will differ . case study 2 highlights a complex aspect of this question whether carrier status constitutes impairment . grounds on which abortion is permitted percentage of countries : to save a woman ’ s life 98 % to preserve physical health 63 % to preserve mental health 62 % rape or incest 43 % fetal impairment 39 % economic or social reasons 33 % on request 27 % . case study 2 ethical issues in duchenne muscular dystrophy screening : in india background duchenne muscular dystrophy ( dmd ) is an x-linked muscle disorder , the severe effects of which almost al-ways occur in boys . if the offspring of a carrier female is male , there is 50 % risk he will be affected ; if the off-spring is female there is a 50 % risk she will be a carrier . the incidence of dmd is similar in all countries , and the frequency at birth is about 1 per 3300 male births . therefore , in india with 25 million annual births , almost 3780 boys are born with this disorder every year . a boy with dmd is expected to live into his late teens or early twenties , depending on treatment ; therefore about 75 , 000 boys in india are affected at any one time . affected boys usually walk late , tend to have poor balance and lose the ability to walk at about 10-12 years . this chronic genetic disease results in a significant health burden for affected individuals , families and the state because there is currently no cure , only treatments to improve the individual symptoms , such as a pacemaker for cardiac symptoms , physiotherapy , surgery and medication . the clinical diagnosis of dmd is confirmed by dna testing , which shows deletions in the dystrophin gene in almost 65 % of cases . the dna diagnostic test is expensive ( about us $ 75 in india ) and parents must pay for the test themselves . however , if the test is conducted by a government-funded institution the service is state-subsidized ( i.e . parents pay approximately half of the $ 75 cost ) . determination of the sex of the fetus is a necessary component of prenatal testing for x-linked diseases . prenatal diagnosis of the disorder is now possible , and the service is available in five institutions in india . pre-natal diagnosis of dmd costs about us $ 300 , a price that is significantly cheaper than in developed countries , but is still expensive for many families in india . case description : a couple with a son affected by dmd and a non-carrier daughter requested prenatal diagnosis for a subsequent pregnancy . the mothers brother was also affected with dmd and died at the age of 20 years . this indicated that unsafe abortion prenatal diagnosis provides information for prospective parents about the health of their fetus . it is common for parents to decide to terminate a pregnancy if prenatal diagnosis reveals a fetal abnormality . access to safe abortion services allows parents to safely terminate an affected pregnancy if they wish . however , many women around the world do not have access to safe abortion . unsafe abortions are defined as abortions carried out either by persons lacking the necessary skills or in an environment that does not conform to minimal medical standards , or both . access to safe abortion for affected fetuses is an important part of comprehensive genetic services . prenatal diagnosis and detection of a fetal abnormality , in the absence of safe abortion services , may mean that some women resort to unsafe abortions , thereby placing them at increased risk of death or serious complications . horovitz et al . comment that in brazil the mother was an obligate carrier of the mutant gene ( i.e . she was a definite carrier , as contrasted with a case occurring in the absence of a family history of dmd , where the mother is considered to be a probable carrier ) . a prenatal diagnosis was conducted and the fetus was diagnosed as a female carrier of dmd . the information regarding sex of the fetus is available to the laboratory but this was not disclosed to the couple . they were informed that the fetus was normal and did not have dmd . the information conveyed to them could mean one of three things : that the fetus was an unaffected male , anon-carrier female or a carrier female . the couple was not satisfied with this information and insisted that they be told the sex of the fetus . they said that they would be happy to continue the pregnancy if the fetus was a normal male , or a normal female , but would like to terminate the pregnancy if the fetus was a female carrier of the dmd mutation . the parents argued that a carrier female would face difficulty in finding a husband and would subsequently require invasive , inconvenient , and costly tests during pregnancy . the laboratory refused to disclose the information requested by the couple be-cause indian law is clear that the sex of the fetus should not be disclosed , except in cases where the information relates to the diagnosis of a genetic disease . ethical , legal and social issues : x-linked genetic diseases pose significant ethical issues in developing countries . in arranged marriages , family medical histories are often discussed , and the potential brides parents can be faced with a difficult decision about whether to reveal to the potential husbands family that their daughter may be a carrier of a serious genetic disorder . the couple discussed above was counselled on two occasions once when the affected child was brought for diagnosis and therapy , and again when the mother was pregnant . there are about 15 genetic counselling centres in india , a number totally insufficient for the demand generated by such a large population . where there are no genetic counselling centres available , the treating specialists ( pediatricians and neurologists etc . ) provide genetic counselling . in the absence of public health insurance , the indian population has to bear the personal anguish and the significant socioeconomic burden associated with the birth of a child with a genetic disease . in cases like the one discussed above laboratories differ in their policies regarding disclosure of sex of the fetus , and whether to reveal that a female fetus is a carrier . families also differ in how they react to this information some continue the pregnancy with carrier females and some do not . those who can afford to pay for a safe abortion usually choose to terminate the affected pregnancy with no health or legal consequences . on the other hand , for most couples the option is between continuation of an affected pregnancy against their will , or an illegal and un-safe abortion , with its risks of social ostracism , prison , health damage , and even death . unsafe abortion is a serious and neglected health care problem in developing countries that severely affects women and , more specifically , women health . unsafe abortions are responsible for 17 % of the maternal mortality in latin america , resulting in a rate of 30 unsafe abortion deaths per10 000 live births . africa has even higher rates:100 unsafe abortion deaths per 10 , 000 live births ( and in east africa this figure rises to 140 unsafe abortion deaths per 10 000 live births ) . this should be a grave concern for developing countries with limited health budgets . for example , a review of the literature found that it is not uncommon for half of all obstetric admissions to be for complications related to unsafe abortions . legal prohibition of abortion does not prevent them from taking place ( note that not all illegal abortions are unsafe ; and conversely not all legal abortions are safe ) . in fact , restrictive legislation is positively associated with a high incidence of unsafe abortion . for example , an estimated 4.5 million terminations are undertaken every year in latin america , 95 % of which are illegal and most of which occur in unsafe conditions , especially those obtained by poorer women . romania significantly restricted abortion laws in 1966 and witnessed a rise in the number of abortion-related deaths , from 20 per 100 , 000 live births in 1965 to 150 in 1983. when abortion was legalized in 1989 , maternal deaths caused by abortion dropped to 60 per 100 , 000. this case demonstrates a clear correlation between restrictive abortion legislation and abortion-related death . the vast majority of unsafe abortions are not related to genetic disorders . women and couples can , however , be put under emotional and psychological strain and serious physical risk in societies where prenatal diagnosis of congenital disorders is available , but abortion of affected fetuses is not . personal views on abortion vary and couples will therefore differ in their response to the knowledge that the fetus has a congenital disorder , but it must be acknowledged that a proportion of such couples will wish to abort affected fetuses for medical reasons . as discussed in section , research in pakistan indicated that 89 % of couples who had a fetus affected with thalassaemia chose to terminate the pregnancy . the role of abortion within medical genetic services : despite the relationship between prenatal diagnosis of congenital anomalies and abortion , genetic services can offer a range of health benefits that are independent of abortion . for some pregnant women and couples , prenatal diagnosis and genetic counselling can provide a valuable service in the absence of legal and safe abortion services , as they can help families , particularly mothers , prepare for the birth of an affected child . however it should be acknowledged that this benefit is only realized if women actually have access to prenatal services and are able to attend counselling . culture , religion and social factors influence not only the views and practices surrounding pregnancy and termination , but also affect a woman ’ s ability to access these services . lack of social mobility , lack of access to household resources in order to pay for services and social norms of permission-seeking behaviour , can limit women ’ s access to genetics and prenatal services . premarital family planning and preconception genetic counselling are other ways of preventing genetic diseases independent of abortion . potential carrier-carrier couples have the option of finding other partners to significantly reduce the risk of their child being affected by a genetic disease ; alternatively couples can choose not to have children , or in some cases to adopt . a small number of couples in developing countries may have access to , and the funds to pay for , in vitro fertilization ( ivf ) , and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis . none of these options involves the termination of affected pregnancies . in light of the divergent , often strongly felt , views about the moral acceptability of abortion , it is important to foster dialogue between patients and families affected by genetic diseases , geneticists , physicians , public health officials , government , religious leaders and other relevant interest groups . public engagement should take account of the socio-cultural taboos surrounding reproduction and abortion , and the division of social space in which men and women can discuss these issues , to ensure that the views of both men and women are included in the decision-making process . a comprehensive nationally coordinated set of genetic services must consider the relationship between prenatal genetic testing , the legality of abortion and the risks to women as a result of unsafe abortion practices . who consultants have stated that : optimum reproductive counselling can take place only in the context of avail-able and affordable contraception and abortion for congenital disorders , and available and affordable resources for caring for persons with disabilities . the dialogue carried out between religious scholars , public policy officials and geneticists in the islamic republic of iran in relation to abortion demonstrates the potential for constructive debate . in the islamic republic of iran , religious scholars have determined a threshold for termination of fetuses with thalassaemia under 15 weeks , in accordance with religious opinion that a baby becomes ensouled at 120 days . country example 4 community engagement in thalassaemia screening in the islamic republic of iran the thalassaemia screening programme in the islamic republic of iran is widely acknowledged as one of the best examples of genetic screening in a developing country . there are an estimated 25 , 000 thalassaemia patients in the islamic republic of iran , accounting for about 0.04 % of the population ; and an estimated 45 % of the population are carriers . this results in about 8,000 at-risk pregnancies per year , approximately one quarter of which are affected by thalassaemia . the programme was initiated in 1996 and within five years . 2.7 million couples had undergone premarital screening . the 10 , 000 couples who were both found tobe carriers were offered genetic counselling . a summary of the programme from 1997 to 2001 showed that on average 53 % of carrier couples still chose to marry despite the genetic reproductive risk . at-risk couples wanted access to prenatal diagnosis and the option of selective termination of affected fetuses . this in-creased demand for termination services sparked de-bate among the public , religious leaders and policy-makers . in 2001 , the law was amended to allow selective termination of fetuses at less than 15 weeks gestation for thalassaemia . it is anticipated that the option of selective termination will subsequently be extended toother serious congenital disorders . governments must take action to address unsafe abortion , which is a serious threat to women and women ’ s health . in countries where abortion for fetal abnormalities is restricted or illegal . sex selection and sex ratios the term sex selection can cover a wide variety of practices , including selecting embryos for implantation in ivf , sperm sorting and selective abortion , and may be carried out for different purposes . sex selection for medical reasons involves selection to avoid producing a child affected by a sex-linked genetic disease . family balancing refers to the selection of a child of a particular sex to achieve a mix of male and female children within a family , in other words for social reasons . many countries , such as australia , germany , the netherlands , the united kingdom , and the united states , are currently considering the ethical and social validity of sex selection for the purposes of family balancing . in some countries , there is no clear preference for choosing a particular sex . for example , one study conducted in germany questioned 1084 men and women aged 1845 about their gender preferences and whether they would use sperm sorting to select for their child ’ s sex . more than half those surveyed had no preference about the sex of their child , with 30 % expressing a desire for a family with an equal number of male and female children . only 4 % would prefer more boys than girls , and 3 % more girls than boys . a slight preference for boys as the firstborn child was also expressed , with 14.2 % wishing for a firstborn son , as against 10.1 % wanting their firstborn to be female . a mere 6 % , however , said they would use sperm sorting to choose the sex of their children . however , sex selection can also be used to create imbalance in the sex ratio in a family , typically in favour of sons . in the context of developing countries , sex selection almost exclusively involves the abortion of female fetuses . unless otherwise specified , we use the term sex selection in this report to refer to the abortion of female fetuses for non-medical reasons . debate is required at the academic and policy level regarding the ethical acceptability of introducing prenatal genetic testing in the absence of safe abortion services for medical purposes . evidence demonstrates that a significant proportion of couples will choose to abort fetuses affected by a serious genetic condition . in the absence of safe abortion services , some women will resort to unsafe abortion , thereby exposing themselves to the associated medical , financial , social and legal risks . the success of the iranian screening programme resulted from the holistic way in which the services were developed . the programme was supported by widespread public education and public health surveillance . the programme proved to be sensitive to the needs of the affected population , capable of engaging diverse sections of the community in debate and of reaching a consensus viewpoint by integrating the views of religious scholars and affected families , thus establishing a workable solution to the issue of termination of affected pregnancies . gender there are a range of gender-related issues associated with the implementation of genetic testing services in developing countries . a consistent concern is the potential for stigmatization of , and discrimination against , vulnerable sections of the community . in communities where the social system does not treat men and women equally and where strict gender roles exist , the scope for discrimination against , and ill treatment of , women is greater . in cultures where marriages are traditionally arranged , there is potential for discrimination against women who are found to be carriers of genetic diseases . a further implication for not only women , but also society in general , is the practice of sex-selective abortion in communities where social and cultural structures strongly favour the birth of male children . the appropriation of medical genetic services , introduced to help patients and families affected by a genetic condition , for the purposes of non-medical sex selection is a serious concern . the following sophisticated genetic diagnostic services are not required to identify the sex of a fetus . ultrasound machine , which are relatively inexpensive and easy to use , have been used worldwide to determine fetal sex for a number of decades , with the invasive procedures of cvs and amniocentesis also employed . in high resource settings , this technology is being supplemented with sperm sorting services and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis ; however , these services are not readily available in developing countries . sex selection and bias against female children approximately 51.3 % of live births are male , giving a live sex ratio of 1.06. the national rates reported throughout europe indicate the consistency of this ratio : austria 51.39 % , belgium 51.27 % , denmark 51.38 % , england and wales 51.26 % , france 51.18 % , germany 51.47 % , italy 51.35 % , netherlands 51.38 % , spain 51.44 % . by contrast , the sex ratios in many developing countries are changing significantly . according to chinas fifth national census in 2000 , the live birth sex ratio had reached approximately 1.17 , meaning that 53.92 % of all births were male . in some regions of china , the ratio was as high as 1.43 or 58.85 % . one explanation for this shift in sex ratios is that the social bias in favour of male children in certain cultures provides an incentive for parents to select the sex of their child or children . sex-selective termination has become common in many countries particularly in china ( including taiwan province ) and the republic of korea , and also in singapore , india and other south asian states . this section examines examples of two of these countries india and china and their efforts to curb the practice of sex-selective abortion of female fetuses . sex-selective abortions in india abortion was legalized in india in 1971 with the introduction of the medical termination of pregnancy act , for cases where the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant women or a grave injury to her physical or mental health or where there is substantial risk that if the child were born , it would suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped . abortions are permitted up to the 20th week of gestation ; however , many illegal abortions are performed by both qualified and unqualified people beyond this limit , and for reasons other than those endorsed in the act . pressure to have male children as a result of son preference , which in combination with the availability of serv-ices for fetal sex determination and abortion , and decreasing fertility , results in some couples seeking pre-natal diagnosis for sex selection and then choosing to abort female fetuses . due to the illegality of the practice , it is impossible to establish the rates of sex-selective abortions in india . to take an individual example , a study was conducted in punjab between 1990 and 1991 on 596 children . fifty four of these children had had their sex identified by ultra-sound before they were born ; 49 of these children , 54 were boys . each of the 5 girls born after their sex had been identified prenatally had either been wrongly identified as a male or had a male twin . the striking feature of this study , despite the small sample size , is the fact that the data implies that none of the pregnancies thought to involve only a female fetus were carried to term . as a result , the sex ratio of the children born is vastly distorted in relation to the natural sex ratio . the study also found a positive correlation between the use of sex selection and mothers ' education and an increase in mothers ' income . it is not clear whether higher education and wealth result in an increased desire to select the sex of the child , or an increase in access to sex selection services , or both . to curb this practice , the indian government introduced the prenatal diagnostic techniques ( regulation and prevention of misuse ) act in 1994. the act limits the use of prenatal diagnosis to the detection of listed diseases and prohibits the use of prenatal diagnosis to determine the sex of a fetus . it also makes it illegal for any person conducting prenatal diagnostic procedures to communicate the sex of the fetus by words , signs , or in any other manner . all genetic counseling centers , genetic laboratories , and genetic clinics are banned from performing prenatal diagnosis to determine the sex of a fetus . genetic counseling centers , genetic laboratories , and genetic clinics must prominently display a notice that disclosure of the sex of a fetus is prohibited by law . in 2002 , the act was amended to include further prohibitions on sex selection . the amendments made it an offense to conduct or aid in conducting sex selection on a woman or a man or on both or on any tissue , embryo , conceptus , fluid , or gametes derived from either or both of them . selling any equipment that could be used to detect the sex of a fetus to a clinic , laboratory , or person not registered under the act was prohibited . finally , all persons were banned from seeking or encouraging the conduct of any sex selection technique and from causing or allowing to be caused the selection of sex before or after conception . however , according to mudur , the act is not enforced , and critics have accused the medical profession in india of showing gross indifference to this issue through their inaction . in 1999 , the indian medical association and the medical council of india instructed doctors to stop performing ultrasounds and terminations for the purpose of sex selection . the indian medical association has stated that it will launch independent investigations of suspected doctors and has threatened to revoke the licenses of doctors found guilty . sex selection and human rights : sex selection is widely condemned in the literature . in its review of ethical issues in medical genetics , who consultants argued that sex selection is oppressive . governments in china and india , where sex selection is widespread , have introduced legislation banning the practice . academics in countries where sex selection is not prevalent and in countries where it is have condemned the practice . the united nations convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women ( cedaw ) requires states parties to take all appropriate measures to modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct of men and women , with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and customary and all other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or the superiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and women . the cedaw committee has specifically addressed the issue of sex-selective abortion . in 1999 , the committee called on the government of china to take all appropriate measures to modify and eliminate son preference by expanding educational and employment opportunities for women in rural areas . it also called for the government to enforce laws against sex-selective practices . in 2000 , the committee commended the government of india for introducing legislation that has banned sex-selective abortions but also called upon the government to elicit the support of medical associations in enforcing professional ethics and preventing sex-selective abortions . however , there is a human rights argument in favor of tolerance of prenatal and pre-implantation sex diagnosis . this argument holds that individual women , who may already be oppressed by family and social structures they are powerless to change , should not be burdened by the continuation or initiation of pregnancies they do not want , in this case , female pregnancies . women are not the sole perpetrators of son preference or the devaluation of women in general and therefore should not be compelled to continue unwanted pregnancies that may further increase the burden on women . who stated in the 2005 world health report : in societies where giving birth to sons defines women 's status and rights as wives , daughters-in-law , and mothers , sex determination and sex-selective abortion allow women to gain control over at least one aspect of their lives . as indicated by the cedaw statement to the government of the people 's republic of china , the solution to sex-selective abortion is likely to lie in social measures that reduce son preference through the promotion of the status of women , such as increasing educational and employment opportunities for girls and women . country example examines some of the reasons for sex selection in china and the country 's attempts to curb this practice . country example : sex-selective abortions in china . in 1999 , the live birth sex ratio in china was 117 males for 100 females or 53.92 % , a significant increase from the 1980 pre-policy rate of 51.69 % . the 2000 national census counted approximately 12.8 million fewer females born between 1980 and 2000 than would be expected based on normal sex ratios . there is a strong cultural preference for sons in china , and son preference is viewed as the fundamental factor influencing the sex ratios . there are three potential explanations for the high ratio : ( a ) parents are underreporting female births and female children to official authorities ; ( b ) female fetuses are selectively aborted ; ( c ) female babies are the victims of infanticide . hypothesis ( a ) challenges the accuracy of the official sex ratio , while explanations ( b ) and ( c ) accept the ratio . zeng et al . argue that data from a range of national and local sources demonstrate that underreporting and sex-selective abortion of female fetuses can explain almost the entire increase in the reported sex ratio , essentially ruling out infanticide and infant abandonment as a main contributing factor . in 1979 , china introduced a one-child policy in an effort to curb its exponential population growth . although the policy is widely referred to as the one-child policy , its implementation has not been uniform and varies significantly between provinces . important exceptions to the one-child rule include the following justifications for a second child : ( a ) the first child is a girl ; ( b ) the first child is disabled ; ( c ) both parents are themselves only children ; and ( d ) the parents have certain occupations . exceptions are more common in rural areas . an estimated 25 % of all communities allow all couples to have two children , and another 30 % of communities allow couples with a girl to have a second child . for the purpose of this report , we are specifically interested in the magnitude of sex-selective female abortions and the role of genetic testing and screening services . the availability of sex-determination technology , based on cvs , amniocentesis , and ultrasound , is viewed by some as a major factor in the increased chinese sex ratio . evidence in favor of the influence of sex-selective technology on the increasing sex ratio is medical genetics services in developing countries , as the shandong province had already passed local prohibitions on such abortions . however , these legal measures are hard to enforce and seem to have had little effect . to redress the problem , china 's political leadership has set the goal of reversing the rising sex ratio over the next few years : `` with the strengthening of the responsibility system , with the joint evaluation of indicators of population quantity and population sex ratios , we aim in three years to bring the trend of rising sex ratios under control . '' the driving motivational force behind sex selection in china is son preference , especially in rural areas . research indicates that an increase in mothers ' education decreases the sex ratio , presumably by reducing son preference . this helps to explain why both shanghai and beijing , with relatively high average levels of education among mothers , have not experienced rising sex ratios despite decreasing fertility . mothers ' education is also associated with higher levels of development and higher family income . gu and roy observed in 1995 that provinces in china with normal sex ratios were those with : ( a ) the highest level of development ( and lower fertility ) , or ( b ) the lowest levels of development ( with high fertility ) . high fertility results in larger families and therefore a higher likelihood that families will naturally include a son . in order to reverse the sex ratios while maintaining small families , son preference must be addressed . it therefore seems that increasing mothers ' education is a promising strategy for reversing an imbalanced sex ratio . conclusion : clearly , sex-selective abortion often occurs due to considerable social pressures , and simple legal prohibitions on such abortions are likely to fail if these social pressures remain strong . thus , it seems likely that adjusting social incentives will be a more effective strategy in combating the practice of sex selection than legislative prohibitions alone . given the apparent high correlation between mothers ' education and the prevalence of normal sex ratios , prioritizing girls ' and women 's education seems to be a promising strategy . the fact that although the one-child policy was implemented in 1979 , sex ratios did not start to rise until about five years later , shortly after sex-selective technology became more widely available . coale and banister argue that the commonality of decreasing fertility and availability of technology for prenatal sex determination are features in both china and the republic of korea , and that these factors explain the rising sex ratios : `` sex-selective abortion also has emerged in korea , which enjoys many forms of advanced technology and where the demand for sex identification is very high because the preference for males is much like that in china . no coercive one-child policy exists in korea , but through voluntary use of contraception and abortion , the total fertility rate in korea has fallen to about 1.5 births per woman . in both the people 's republic of china and south korea ( republic of korea ) , couples strongly desire more sons than daughters , on average . as prenatal sex determination has become available , parents in both countries have evidently used it . '' the one-child policy , and in particular the monetary penalty for exceeding the designated limits , is widely believed to be a contributing factor in the rising sex ratio ; however , it is difficult to disassociate this influence from the other factors discussed above . for example , shanghai and beijing , where the one-child policy has been most effective , have relatively normal sex ratios . irrespective of the specific causes of sex-selective abortion , it must be acknowledged that the practice reflects morally unacceptable social discrimination against females . anti-female sex selection contravenes the principle of gender equality ; female infanticide and abandonment are a serious violation of the fundamental human rights of women and children . the chinese government has tried a number of methods to reverse the sex ratio . in 1994 , china prohibited the use of ultrasounds or other technical means to detect the sex of an unborn fetus , except where necessary on medical grounds . as of 2003 , sex-selective abortions were also prohibited , although some provinces such ... country example on this issue , the united nations population fund has stated that : overall , the value of girl children to both their family and society must be expanded beyond their definition as potential child-bearers and caretakers and reinforced through the adoption and implementation of educational and social policies that encourage their full participation in the development of the societies in which they live . leaders at all levels of the society must speak out and act forcefully against patterns of gender discrimination within the family , based on preference for sons . one of the aims should be to eliminate excess mortality of girls , wherever such a pattern exists . special education and public information efforts are needed to promote equal treatment of girls and boys with respect to nutrition , health care , education and social , economic and political activity , as well as equitable inheritance rights . governments are urged to take the necessary measures to prevent infanticide , prenatal sex selection . one example of a country that has successfully reversed the rise in sex ratios is the republic of korea . in the mid-1990s , sex ratios at birth for the third and fourth child had increased dramatically , peaking at their highest level above 200 ( reaching as high as 240 for the fourth child in 1993 ) . the live birth sex ratio for third and fourth children decreased to approximately 150 in 2003 as a result of the following government initiatives : legal and policy measures : these included legal prohibitions on sex determination and strong policy measures to prevent sex-selective abortion , implemented through medical guidelines , norms , and codes . these have been enforced since 1992 ; doctors found guilty of conducting sex-selective abortions are de-licensed . mass media campaigns : media campaigns were initiated in 1991 encouraging couples to change their attitudes to sex-selective abortion . social policies : the initiatives included a range of policies to bring about changes in gender norms , values , and attitudes in addition to specific policies to improve the status of women by increasing education and employment opportunities . discrimination and stigmatization : the issues central to debates concerning hiv testing , such as discrimination , psychological trauma , and stigmatization , reverberate in discussion surrounding genetic testing . as has been seen with the hiv/aids epidemic , the combination of lack of treatment , low levels of public education about the disease , and fear of stigmatization can create informal barriers to people seeking testing . for the 40 million people living with hiv/aids , particularly those in developing countries , stigmatization and discrimination discourage many individuals from seeking treatment for , and information about , the disease . as the united nations educational , scientific and cultural organization ( unesco ) has stated , many are even afraid to take the aids test because of the shame associated with the pandemic . this same pattern of stigmatization and fear has been observed in response to some genetic testing and screening programs . the informal barriers arising as a result of systemic stigmatization and discrimination of those affected by genetic conditions breach the principle of distributive justice because while services may be available within a community , some people have their access to those services unjustifiably and unfairly restricted . the potential for discrimination and stigmatization as a result of genetic testing has been a primary focus of debates regarding ethics , regulation , and legislation in developed countries . however , in these countries , the focus has generally been on discrimination in relation to insurance or employment . while these are also relevant concerns in many developing countries , there is the additional concern of discrimination in relation to marriage , and this is a burden that is expected to fall disproportionately on women . arranged marriage : arranged marriages and arranged introductions are common in communities throughout india , pakistan , sri lanka , the middle east , and parts of africa , as well as in certain communities living in other regions , such as the orthodox jewish community . many cultures that favor arranged marriages also favor consanguineous and endogamous marriages . the formal process of arranging marriages or introductions can provide a window for genetic screening services to be offered to the population in question . premarital screening can provide individuals and couples with greater reproductive choice . if genetic screening is conducted prior to partner selection , available reproductive choices include ( a ) the decision to change reproductive partner ; ( b ) the decision not to have children or to adopt ; ( c ) the decision to request pre-implantation diagnosis or prenatal diagnosis ; or ( d ) if prenatal diagnosis identifies an affected fetus , the parents can choose to prepare for the management of the disorder or to terminate the affected pregnancy . throughout the report , we argue that sensitivity to the local socio-cultural context can improve the efficiency of genetic testing and screening programs . however , it is important to point out that the process of non-voluntary arranged marriage contravenes the human rights principle of free and full consent in marriage . the universal declaration of human rights states that marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses . although the report discusses strategies for minimizing discrimination as a result of genetic testing and screening programs in communities where arranged marriages are popular , we recognize that non-voluntary arranged marriage breaches human rights and do not endorse this practice . however , it should also be noted that many arranged marriages are voluntarily entered into . empirical evidence suggests that premarital screening and discovery of mutual carrier status for a particular disorder often does not lead couples to separate and choose other partners . for example , in the islamic republic of iran , where many marriages are arranged , more than 50 % of couples who discover they are at risk of passing on a recessive genetic disease to their children still marry and then utilize prenatal diagnostic services . arranged marriages and the stigmatization of female carriers of genetic diseases while premarital screening can increase reproductive choice , it can also lead to physiological and emotional stress and strain within the relationship , in addition to social discrimination and stigmatization . these negative repercussions need to be acknowledged and minimized . where marriages are arranged , families may be less inclined to match their children with a person who is known to be a carrier for a genetic disease . in some communities , this may lead to stigmatization of carrier individuals . in societies where women are not treated as equal to men , the burden of stigmatization and discrimination due to carrier status for genetic diseases can disproportionately affect women . one effect of this discrimination is that in communities favoring arranged marriage or introductions , women identified as carriers of a genetic disorder may be unable to find a husband . in research concerning the screening of extended families for hemoglobin diseases in pakistan , a country where arranged marriages are common , ahmed et al . found that the parents of women found to be carriers preferred to postpone testing of the partner until after marriage and then to use prenatal diagnosis . this option is obviously more suited to medical genetics services in developing countries communities , such as pakistan , that permit abortion of affected fetuses . concerns regarding the eligibility of female carriers can also arise in developed countries . some conservative subsections of the ashkenazi jewish communities continue to favor arranged introductions . in addition , this community experiences a high prevalence of a number of recessive genetic diseases . therefore , fears have been expressed that carrier screening could lead to the discrimination of female carriers by creating a class of unmarriageable women . the potential for discrimination against carriers , particularly women , is a significant threat to the equitable and fair integration of genetic carrier screening in developing , as well as developed , countries . responses : there are a number of responses to this potential form of discrimination . the dor yeshorim genetic screening model described below ( community example ) offers an example of a response to this concern in developed countries . the student screening program for genetic blood diseases in the kingdom of bahrain presents a different approach based on community education . a range of specific genetic diseases occur at higher prevalence in the ashkenazi jewish population . one example is tay-sachs disease , a degenerative neurological disorder that follows an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern . one in 25 ashkenazi jews are carriers for the disease , and screening for the mutation is well established . the strict orthodox jewish community has specific social and cultural requirements for a successful genetic screening program because they do not endorse prenatal diagnosis or abortion . in this community , marriage often arises as a result of an arranged introduction undertaken by parents , with the support of a professional matchmaker . in response to demand for carrier screening , a private international organization called dor yeshorim was established in the united states in the late 1980s to provide pre-introduction screening of teenagers for tay-sachs disease . the service now includes carrier testing for up to 10 genetic diseases . in the united kingdom in 2004 , the set of tests cost 150. one major concern raised in relation to the screening program was the potential stigma that detected carriers , particularly women , could suffer and how this might affect their chances of being introduced to potential partners . the pro-community example dor yeshorim as a response to the specific cultural needs of the ashkenazi jewish population developed an innovative solution to minimize stigmatization and discrimination of identified carriers : test results remain confidential , even to the individual and their family . each blood sample is given a code number , and the results are stored in an international database only under the code , which is given to individuals and their parents . prior to an introduction , the codes of both potential partners will be given to the professional matchmakers who will submit them to dor yeshorim for analysis . the matchmaker , and subsequently the families , will receive one of two responses : compatible or incompatible . if the result is incompatible , the introduction will not occur , but neither family will know for which of the 10 diseases their child is a carrier . the dor yeshorim service has successfully reduced the birth of children affected with the recessive genetic disorders it screens for and provides an innovative example of the way in which genetic services can be adapted to the cultural and social requirements of different communities . there are , however , valid concerns with this approach . keeping the test results confidential does not tackle and may , in fact , perpetuate , the underlying stigma associated with genetic disease . furthermore , the strict rules regarding confidentiality run contrary to the principle of autonomy because patients are not allowed access to the results even if they request them . in the absence of viable alternatives except to undergo testing for each disorder independently , which can often be restrictively expensive and time-consuming , the confidentiality clause can seriously impede individuals ' autonomy . this limitation can be very frustrating for individuals who wish to know their carrier status . some have argued for the availability of publicly funded alternatives to the dor yeshorim model to increase choice among the ashkenazi jewish population . by contrast , the student screening program for genetic blood diseases in the kingdom of bahrain represents a different response to the potential discrimination of carriers in marriage . it relies on a system of comprehensive community education to address stigmatization and discrimination , rather than strict confidentiality of test results . this approach has been very important in addressing the initial public resistance to the screening program because of concerns that girls found to be carriers would not be able to find husbands . the program includes an education campaign targeted at teachers , parents , and children , which emphasizes that ( a ) all people carry some defective genes ; ( b ) if a carrier married a non-carrier , they would be able to avoid the heightened risk of giving birth to an affected child ; ( c ) that although carriers were advised to marry non-carriers instead , they were not prevented from marrying other carriers . by relying on a comprehensive education program to reduce stigma and discrimination of carriers , public understanding about genetic disease , how it is passed on , and how it can be treated or prevented is likely to increase . some research suggests that the potential for discrimination may be lower in communities that favor consanguineous marriage , such as the kingdom of bahrain , because of the highly cohesive and mutually supportive nature of family and community structures . a study of south indian families at risk of familial adenomatous polyposis concluded that this tight-knit , supportive social structure might result in less stigmatization of affected and carrier individuals . regulation : anti-discrimination regulations in countries are founded on the principles of fundamental human rights , which are enshrined in regional and international instruments . countries that have ratified international human rights treaties have taken on an obligation to give effect to the rights contained within these documents through their national legal systems . several international human rights documents address the issue of genetic discrimination . the unesco 2003 international declaration of human genetic data asserts that every effort should be made to ensure human genetic data are not used for purposes intending or having the effect of infringing upon human rights , fundamental freedoms , or the human dignity of an individual . the council of europe also addresses genetic information in the convention on human rights and biomedicine ; however , it uses the more general wording any form of discrimination against a person on grounds of his or her genetic heritage is prohibited . a number of developing countries have introduced legislative measures to discourage or prohibit discrimination and stigmatization , some of which focus on discrimination specifically related to medical conditions or genetic disease . in georgia , for example , discrimination on the grounds of genetic heritage is prohibited . medical genetics services in developing countries : other countries have enacted more general prohibitions of discrimination on the grounds of health status . under the law of peru , individuals have the right not to be discriminated against for suffering a disease or disorder . the fijian constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability , which could include genetic disease . similarly , the constitution of ghana guarantees freedom from discrimination . privacy and confidentiality : as noted in the previous section , there are genuine concerns that people who are affected by a genetic disease or are disease carriers may suffer stigmatization and discrimination . as an example , the previous section discussed the potential for discrimination against women in countries that favor arranged marriage , and the stigmatization suffered by thalassemia patients in sri lanka is discussed in case study 3. privacy and confidentiality standards are a vital tool for protecting individuals from possible discrimination and stigmatization on the basis of a genetic disorder . both the right to privacy and the right to confidentiality can be derived from the principle of autonomy . autonomy , broadly understood , is the capacity for self-determination : based on the idea of a region of sovereignty for the self and the right to protect it by restricting access . protecting privacy is one aspect of protecting the realm of personal space . privacy , fully conceived , can include all things that fall within this personal space — bodily integrity , mental space , personal relationships , and personal information . privacy is often defined more narrowly as relating exclusively to information about a person . for the purposes of the following discussion , we are interested in this narrower definition , though in the context of genetic testing , privacy and confidentiality rights can extend to the right not to disclose information to third parties and the right not to undergo testing . privacy and confidentiality are two related , overlapping , but distinct concepts . the difference is : an infringement of x 's right to confidentiality occurs only if the person to whom x disclosed the information in confidence fails to protect the information or deliberately discloses it to someone without x 's consent . by contrast , a person who , without authorization , enters a hospital record room or computer databank violates rights of privacy rather than rights of confidentiality . privacy and confidentiality may be particularly important in countries where genetic diseases are not well understood and where widespread knowledge of an individual 's genetic status ( such as the fact that a woman is a carrier for a disorder ) may affect them socially . the limit of an individual 's right to confidentiality of genetic test results is a question that generates controversy . in australia , canada , new zealand , the united kingdom , the united states , and many european countries , confidentiality is currently considered to be paramount , and full consent must be received before any information is disclosed to third parties . however , because genetic information may affect an entire family , rather than only the individual , the information revealed by genetic testing may be relevant to the health of people beyond the patient themselves . in many cultures , especially in highly endogamous or consanguineous communities , and where arranged marriage is the norm , a genetic disease may influence not only the marriage prospects of the affected individual but potentially all members of the extended family . under such circumstances , it may be necessary to balance respect for patient confidentiality against the needs and considerations of other family members for whom information about genetic risk could influence decision-making about their health or reproduction . achieving this balance is a challenging task and is rightly the responsibility of medical genetics services in developing countries , which has passed laws to protect citizens ' health care rights and to ensure the inviolability of citizens ' dignity and privacy . other countries , for instance peru , and argentina , have passed more generic privacy and confidentiality laws that do not focus on genetic information specifically but which may cover it . as an example , peruvian law states that all users of health services shall have the right to respect for his or her person , dignity and privacy and to demand confidentiality of his or her medical information . turkish law holds that the patient may request that data concerning his state of health are not communicated to himself , to his family , or his associates and that respect for a patient 's privacy is a fundamental principle . the law further states that every medical procedure shall be carried out in such a way that the patient 's privacy is respected . the implementation of the privacy legislation and regulations discussed above is commendable ; however , it should be acknowledged that there is the potential for discrepancies between law , policy , and practice . enforcement can often depend on a number of factors relating to the status of the individual whose rights have been breached , including socioeconomic , ethnic , or other status . in settings where female carriers are stigmatized and where there are social repercussions for the reputation of the family , any further publicity of test results is likely to serve as a significant disincentive to people bringing cases to court or even reporting a breach of confidentiality or privacy . women may be especially disadvantaged in this respect as they may be unable to access mechanisms for remedying discrimination on the basis of gender . for example , in some countries , women may lack legal standing to bring complaints or face bias within the legal system . they may also be unable to access mechanisms to report and remedy discrimination due to restrictions on their access to public spaces or illiteracy . national governments , who should consider the risk of discrimination to the patient and the potential harm to other family members within that local context . regulation international human rights documents state that individuals should be protected from unauthorized disclosure of genetic information and assert a patient 's right to be informed of genetic test results . also addressed are issues of authorized disclosure and unauthorized disclosure to third parties for public interest reasons . legislative measures in this area seek to ensure that medical practitioners and people with access to sensitive medical and genetic information are prevented from disseminating that information to other family members or more widely . legislation may also provide sanctions to encourage compliance . one example of a developing country that has introduced such protection is georgia , patient rights in georgia since 2000 , georgian citizens have enjoyed the right to information about proposed procedures , the results of medical examinations , alternative treatments , diagnosis and prognosis and the right to determine with whom this information may be shared . health care providers are also required to maintain a patient 's confidentiality . in georgia , informed consent is required for the lawful provision of a medical service , which would most likely include a genetic test . genetic testing to identify a genetic disorder or predisposition to a disorder maybe carried out only for the purposes of the patient 's healthcare or for health-related scientific research . together , these two provisions work to ensure that only necessary , voluntary genetic testing will occur . medical genetic services in developing countries . facilitating patient decision-making the who genomics and world health report states that the importance of developing genetic services worldwide , including public education and genetic counseling , can not be overemphasized . the report warns against introducing medical genetic services in the absence of public education and without the support of genetic counselors . in 1993 , a who scientific group endorsed the following principles of genetic counseling : ( a ) the autonomy of the individual or couple , ( b ) their right to full information , and ( c ) strict confidentiality of genetic test results . autonomy individual autonomy refers to the capacity to be one 's own person ; to live one 's life according to reasons and motives that are one 's own and not the product of manipulative or distorting external forces . autonomy is also described as a second-order capacity of persons to reflect critically on their first order preferences , desires , and wishes , and the capacity to accept or to attempt to change them . by exercising such a capacity , persons define their nature , give meaning and coherence to their lives , and take responsibility for the kind of person they are . the principle of autonomy in the context of health care draws attention to the fact that each individual has personal beliefs and values , and their own life plan ; it states therefore that competent individuals are in the best position to make decisions regarding potential medical interventions . the value of autonomy is ultimately based on respect for persons , and the preservation of their dignity . in health care , respect for autonomy is typically contrasted with paternalism . paternalism is the intentional overriding of one person 's known preferences or actions by another person , where the person who overrides justifies the action by the goal of benefiting or avoiding harm to the person whose will is overridden . while in many cultures doctors have traditionally played this role in relation to their patients , autonomy is now widely accepted as a core ethical principle of medicine . respect for autonomy emphasizes the value of a competent individual 's informed and voluntary decisions . however , as noted earlier , the gap between policy and practice can be wide , and in many countries paternalistic medical structures persist . women may be especially vulnerable to paternalism in medicine , particularly if they are illiterate or have had limited access to education , and/or live in societies where gender norms constrain women 's autonomous decision-making and encourage women to defer to authority , particularly male authority . a requirement of autonomy is the practical ability to act on decisions . in practice , autonomous choice depends on the availability of economically , socially , and legally viable alternatives . limited resources both material and human/personal and societal can significantly limit the scope of autonomy . further , social expectations based on sex , class , and ethnicity can affect the availability of viable alternatives . informed consent the principles of informed consent in the context of genetic testing are upheld in several human rights instruments . obtaining informed consent to genetic testing and screening is essential to promote individual autonomy in medical decision-making . the process of gaining informed consent aims to ensure that the individual understands the relevant information ( medical , social , and/or legal ) and that their decision to undergo any medical intervention is made voluntarily . valid informed consent for genetic testing requires a bilateral process involving a dialogue of questions and answers between the individual considering testing and the person obtaining informed consent ( often a health care professional ) . this dialogue requires the person obtaining informed consent to gauge the appropriate level of language and technical detail suitable for the individual 's understanding . preconditions the person considering testing should be competent to make autonomous decisions ( for example , children and persons with mental impairment may or may not be considered competent ; local laws and regulations often provide further guidance on the requirements for competency ) ; aware that the decision to undergo testing is voluntary ; and substantially free from control by others ( for example , there should be no coercion , subordination , and undue influence ) . consent : the individual makes an autonomous decision to undergo or refuse testing . individuals may choose not to make an immediate decision or may subsequently change their mind ; even after the test has been performed , individuals may choose not to receive the test results . authorization : this is the formal process of recording the individual 's informed consent to undergo testing , usually in writing . specific authorization forms differ between institutions ; however , it is good practice for these forms to include a record of the issues discussed prior to consent . practices like these may vary ; the fundamental principles underlying this model should be adhered to . for example , illiteracy is not an excuse for doing away with authorization . informed consent in developing countries—most developed and some developing countries—have enacted legislation requiring that informed consent is obtained for medical procedures , including genetic testing . under peruvian law , consent is required for medical treatment , except in the event of an emergency . each person must be given all information necessary to give informed consent or refusal prior to any treatment . this includes the right to receive comprehensive and comprehensible information about his or her condition , including diagnosis , prognosis , alternative treatments , and the risks associated with treatments prescribed and administered . individuals also have the right not to be subjected to non-consensual examination or treatment . the public health code of guinea requires that individual autonomy and the right to self-determination of all people be respected in relation to health care . turkish law contains various provisions designed to promote autonomous choice in medical treatment . the fijian constitution holds that every person has the right to freedom from scientific or medical treatment or procedures without his or her informed consent , or , if he or she is incapable of giving informed consent , without the informed consent of a lawful guardian . counselling : genetic counselling is the process by which individuals at risk of a disorder that may be hereditary are advised of the consequences of the disorder , the probability of developing or transmitting it , and the ways in which this may be prevented , avoided , or ameliorated . it is an acknowledged standard of practice that this be done in a respectful , non-directive , and confidential manner . genetic counselling is a service that aims to respect , protect , and foster individual autonomy when decisions are made regarding the use of medical genetic services , for example , genetic testing . the primary role of genetic counsellors is to facilitate autonomous decision-making . many developed countries have established training programmes to generate specialized genetic counsellors to work alongside clinical geneticists in providing tertiary-level genetic services . in these specialist tertiary care settings , a genetic counsellor works within a multidisciplinary team and acts as the primary liaison between the patient and other medical professionals . genetic counsellors can also act as a knowledge resource and educator for other health professionals , as well as the general public . in most developed and developing countries , there is a severe shortage of genetic counsellors . inequities in access to genetic counselling should be tackled with proper funding and training of different kinds of health professionals at the primary health care level . in the late 1990s , with the help of outside funding and collaboration between oxford university and the university of toronto , a national thalassaemia treatment centre was built in kurunegala , sri lanka , and a central diagnostic laboratory was established at ragama . this site was selected because , although thalassaemia occurs in many communities throughout sri lanka , by far the largest number attend the government hospital at kurunegala , where close to 500 patients are registered . after a preliminary study to assess the frequency of thalassaemia throughout the country , patients attending the main centres were fully genotyped . it was found that between 10 and 30 % of the patients had hb e-thalassaemia while the rest had transfusion-dependent -thalassaemia major . blood is available for transfusion , and the government supplies desferrioxamine , * although there has been a shortage of the drug at times and an even greater shortage of pumps to administer it . the quality of clinical care and documentation in kurunegala is now quite high , although there is much work to be done in the other centres in the country . as the programme evolved , it became clear that counselling and support for the families of thalassaemic children would be critical and that the sri lankan doctors looking after these patients would have very limited time for this purpose . for these reasons , it was decided to try to conduct a pilot programme to examine the social consequences and related ethical issues affecting the thalassaemia population in kurunegala . there are very few trained counsellors , and even fewer genetic counsellors , in sri lanka . however , the centre became aware of the work of the reverend father anthony fernando , who obtained his ph.d. in psychology in the united states . father anthony runs a 12-month formal course in counselling , though not specifically genetic counselling , at the university of peradeniya . one of the students on this course , mr h.g . sampath , joined the national thalassaemia centre in kurunegala , first on a voluntary basis , and then with some small financial help from the local parents thalassaemia association . he sees all the patients and their families in the clinic and has been able to make a number of home visits . the latter is extremely difficult because many of the patients live long distances from the hospital in villages that can only be reached by bus.patients : thalassaemic patients are sometimes isolated in society , and , in the past , when blood for their transfusions had to come from their family members , they were labelled blood suckers . as a result of adverse public responses to their disease , a proportion of the children do not attend school , and adolescent patients tend to drop out of school and disengage with society . this is exacerbated by the schools ' tendency not to allow the thalassaemic children to take part in extra-curricular activities . the preliminary report notes that there is also a tendency for the children to despise their parents as they get older , and many blame them for their disease . particular stresses occur among children who are born into families with unaffected children as this seems to add further to their exclusion from family life . in families with multiple affected children , the death of one causes severe psychological trauma to the remaining child ( ren ) . parents : preliminary counselling in the hospital has clearly done little to increase understanding of thalassaemia among many of the parents and families . husbands tend to blame their wives for the disease in their child . there are misconceptions about the cause of thalassaemia , and it is widely believed that it results from drugs administered during pregnancy . a considerable number of the parents have resorted to local healers , and there is an increasingly high frequency of depressive illness with several suicides among the mothers . these problems have been exacerbated by other family strains , including the diversion of the mother 's attention to the children at the expense of the husband , and a decrease in the wife 's sexual responses due to stress or fear of bearing another thalassaemic child . challenges : it is clear that the initial time-consuming explanation of the nature of genetic disease , and the patterns of its inheritance , are still very difficult for much of the population to understand . it is also extremely difficult to persuade people found to be carriers that the heterozygous state is not a disease . women feel particularly isolated when they are found to be carriers because in a society with a large number of arranged marriages , they feel they may never marry . there have been preliminary debates on the possibility of developing prenatal diagnosis programmes , but termination of pregnancy is illegal in sri lanka ( even though a very large number of terminations occur annually ) . despite these concerns and the pressures on the clinics , disease management is improving , as is the morale of patients in kurunegala . there is an urgent need to train counsellors in developing countries . a counselling course has been developed in sri lanka , by the department of clinical genetics in colombo , and it is planned to try to obtain at least one fully trained counsellor for each centre on the island . a great deal more research needs to be undertaken into the best ways of educating populations , particularly those with little formal education , about the complexities of genetic disease . this work needs to be followed up by an equally careful assessment of the outcomes . above all , it is clear that because of the complex social structures of different societies in developing countries , it can not be assumed that methods that are used in high-resource settings will be applicable . at least from the very preliminary observations in sri lanka , it appears that the social and ethical problems raised by the thalassaemias , and their effects on families , have been grossly underestimated in our thinking about the development of thalassaemia services . * desferrioxamine is a medicine that binds to excess iron in the body and allows it to be excreted , therefore avoiding excess iron build-up in the body which results from regular blood transfusions.directive counselling : as noted above , a well-accepted goal of genetic counselling is the promotion of autonomy and human dignity by assisting people to make independent and voluntary decisions . scaling up genetic counselling capacity in saudi arabia : premarital screening for sickle cell disease and -thalassaemia is now compulsory in the kingdom of saudi arabia . this screening programme has apparently been well-received by the community because it allows couples to make informed decisions about marriage with knowledge of the reproductive risks and prenatal options , and it has not been linked to enforced prevention of genetically at-risk marriages . however , the current lack of genetic counsellors in the kingdom of saudi arabia poses an immediate problem for preventive programmes designed to reduce the occurrence of genetic diseases . as an interim solution , short intensive training programmes for medical and health science professionals are being established . these are typically conducted at major hospitals on an ad hoc basis , although a national training programme for genetic counsellors is under consideration . the medical genetics department at the king faisal specialist hospital research centre is establishing a short generic genetics training programme ; the diabetes centre at the king abdul aziz university hospital in riyadh runs an intense diabetic educators programme for individuals working in diabetic care . both of these courses specifically address genetic counselling and include presentations by qualified genetic counsellors . health professionals involved in the compulsory premarital screening program for sickle cell disease and thalassaemia receive instruction in the genetics of these diseases . it is envisaged that professionals who receive training in these programs will work alongside qualified medical professionals to provide basic genetic counselling . however , we argue in this report that participation in genetic testing and screening programs should be voluntary . however , in practice , pure non-directiveness can be difficult if not impossible to achieve . both counsellors ' unavoidable personal views and biases , and patients ' expectations that their physician will offer advice , can present challenges to the principle of non-directiveness . it is therefore important to distinguish between 1 ) medical knowledge , experience , and advice on the one hand ; and 2 ) personal values , life plans , and autonomous decisions on the other . physicians can and should offer medical advice , and this guidance may be very helpful for the individual or couple . in offering this advice , physicians should be aware of their own biases and should not attempt to manipulate the values or the decision of the couple . decisions are made not only on the basis of knowledge , in this case , medical knowledge , but also personal values . it is for this reason that the individual should make the final decision about the appropriate course of action for them . there may be a role for physicians to challenge the couples ' decision to ensure that it is autonomous and that they have deliberated sufficiently about the available choice . despite ongoing debate about the precise standards of non-directiveness , the essential point is that counsellors and physicians should present information in as unbiased a manner as possible ; should not attempt to manipulate the individuals ' or couples ' decision-making process ; and should respect the autonomous decision of the individual or couple . directive genetic counselling is thought to be a widespread problem , occurring not only in countries that appear to endorse this approach but also those that formally discourage or even ban this practice . the directive nature of genetic counselling in china has attracted attention . in 1995 , the chinese law on maternal and child health care came into effect . international concern focused on articles 10 and 18. article 10 states that after providing a premarital physical check-up , physicians should inform the couple if they have been diagnosed with a genetic disease that is considered inappropriate for childbearing from a medical point of view . the couple may then be married only if they a ) agree to long-term contraception or b ) undergo a tubal ligation , hysterectomy , or vasectomy . in addition , article 18 of the maternal and child health law states that the physician shall give the couple medical advice for termination of pregnancy if 1 ) the fetus is suffering from a genetic disease of a serious nature ; 2 ) the fetus is found to have a defect of a serious nature ; or 3 ) the continuation of pregnancy seriously endangers the life of the mother . however , it should be noted that there are no enforcement mechanisms in place for this law , and it is viewed more as a standard of care . this approach to counselling appears to be directive . the language used , at least in the translations accessed by who , is not restricted to informing , warning , or supporting the couple to make an independent choice but extends to offering specific advice to terminate the pregnancy . whether in practice , this results in directive counselling depends on whether the advice is limited to unbiased medical information or extends to trying to influence the couples ' values and their decisions regarding abortion . one possible motivation for this approach to counselling is the public benefit of reducing the health burden of congenital diseases . for example , chinese minister of public health chen minzhang has stressed that the cost of looking after those with hereditary handicaps was enormous , imposing a heavy burden both on the state and on millions of families . in developed , high-income countries with good public health infrastructure , the cost of caring for a child born with a genetic disorder is often carried , partly or fully , by the state . however , in many developing countries , neither families nor governments have the financial resources to care for and support a significant number of children with severe genetic disorders . in india , for example , prenatal diagnosis ( pnd ) is seen as an important preventive measure to reduce the burden of β-thalassaemia . it has been reported that after pnd parents are counselled to continue the pregnancy only in the case of unaffected fetuses . prevention is indeed an essential part of comprehensive medical genetic services , but this perceived tension between care and prevention represents a false dichotomy . as programs in cuba , cyprus , the islamic republic of iran , and thailand demonstrate , prevention of the occurrence of genetic disease and care of those affected go hand in hand . appropriate care for affected individuals reduces stigma and increases trust in the public health system , thereby improving the effectiveness of prevention programs ; while effective prevention programs free resources for the care of individuals with the disease . furthermore , evidence suggests that a high proportion of couples will voluntarily choose to terminate pregnancies that are affected by a severe genetic condition when safe abortion services are available . another possible reason for the use of directive counselling in developing countries may be the pervasive tradition of paternalism in medicine . for example , where there are high rates of illiteracy among the general public , many physicians take a paternalistic stance that it is their duty to direct a less-educated population . some individuals expect to be told what to do by their doctors and so do not question this directive approach . there is an important distinction , however , between making an autonomous choice to accept medical advice from a physician , and a prima facie assumption that it is the physician 's role and responsibility to decide what interventions are in their patients ' best interests . sub-populations with lower rates of literacy , typically women and those of a lower socioeconomic strata , are more likely to experience medical paternalism . despite the pervasiveness of the paternalistic approach to health care in many countries , it is important to re-emphasize the value of autonomy . decisions regarding health and reproduction are deeply personal and are typically made based on both information and values . while health care professionals should offer advice regarding the medical genetics services in developing countries known health consequences of specific interventions , patients themselves are in the best position to know their own personal values . it is important that once health care professionals have discussed the medical implications of potential treatment options with the patient , the patients are then encouraged to make autonomous decisions . patient support organizations support organizations worldwide provide valuable resources for both patients and health care providers . support groups often have the most up-to-date information on genetic research and available tests and treatments , particularly for rare genetic diseases . such groups are valuable in providing long-term support for affected persons and can be very effective when working alongside regional genetic services . they can provide a good network for collecting and coordinating funds for research and other resources . for example , the local parents thalassaemia association in kurunegala , sri lanka , raised funds for a counsellor to be employed for the patients and families receiving treatment at the national thalassaemia centre in kurunegala . support organizations can also act as a platform for communication with affected communities , especially those that have difficulty accessing genetic services . they can facilitate the recruitment of research subjects , contact large family groups , and disseminate new information . even developed countries have a shortage of specialized genetic counsellors , and therefore such services are often supplemented by patient support organizations . for example , the majority of public education about tay-sachs disease in the united kingdom is conducted by volunteers from the charitable organization jewish care . while the organization currently seems to be able to fulfill the education needs of those affected by the disease , the situation does raise the question of whether governments and public health systems should be relying on a charity or volunteer organization to provide disease education and counselling for affected families and their communities . parents ' associations have played a fundamental role in improving β-thalassaemia treatment and population screening in many mediterranean countries over the last 25 years . the thalassaemia prevention strategy in cyprus consists of four interdependent techniques : 1 ) public education , 2 ) population screening , 3 ) genetic counselling , and 4 ) pnd . the program is extremely successful , and cases of thalassaemia declined by 97 % between 1975 and 1984. part of the success of the program has been attributed to the very active parents association and the supportive role of the orthodox church . the cyprus parents association argued strongly in favour of a premarital thalassaemia certificate . in 1983 , the orthodox church , although it does not support termination of affected pregnancies , agreed to the prerequisite that all couples undergo carrier screening for thalassaemia and receive genetic counselling before marriage . carrier couples are not prevented from marrying . the thalassaemia international federation ( tif ) was established in 1986 by a small group of thalassaemia patients and parents from cyprus , italy , the united kingdom , and the united states . tif works to improve awareness and support prevention of thalassaemia and promote clinical management of affected patients . tif also collaborates with governments and official health bodies , such as who . tif runs regional and national workshops on the treatment and prevention of thalassaemias , including genetic counselling ; produces educational material for patients , families , and physicians around the world ( which is distributed free of charge ) ; and provides networks for health professionals involved with thalassaemia care , among other activities . case study 4 illustrates the essential role that patient support organizations can play in low-resource settings . medical genetics services in developing countries nigeria 2001-2003 background sickle cell disease is a widespread problem in africa . its prevalence is partly due to the fact that carriers may be protected against some forms of malaria . in africa , an estimated 7.4/1000 children are born affected with sickle cell disease , and this figure reaches as high as 14.8/1000 in west africa . sickle cell disease is thought to be responsible for 4 % of under-5 mortality in west and middle africa . in nigeria , sickle cell disease is stigmatized , largely due to the almost complete lack of appropriate or affordable services . for this reason , virtually all nigerian couples with affected fetuses opt for termination of pregnancy . in the absence of genetic services for sickle cell disease , patient support and advocacy groups , such as the sickle cell club ( scc ) , play a significant role . the scc is a non-governmental organization present in a few centers in nigeria and run by volunteers . membership of the scc comprises a disproportionate number of the poorer members of society , as more affluent families are deterred by the stigma associated with sickle cell disease . the scc runs a pnd service by cvs , with samples sent to their collaborating perinatal unit in london for molecular diagnosis . prenatal genetic testing is still beyond the financial means of the vast majority of nigerians , partly because test samples must be sent abroad for analysis . the service costs us $ 400 , of which us $ 265 is transferred to the perinatal unit in london . sending the samples abroad can also result in delays in receiving results . meeting the potential demand for prenatal genetic testing requires that molecular diagnosis be available locally . it should be noted that molecular testing is not necessary to determine carrier status for sickle cell disease , which can be determined by a phenotypic test , using a simple hemoglobin electrophoresis . case description mr. and mrs. a married in 2001. before then , their families had insisted on determining their genotypes to ensure that they did not bear children with sickle cell disease . this was principally because mr. a 's elder brother had lost a number of children to sickle cell disease . mr. a already knew that he was a carrier . when mrs. a took the genetic test , offered by a commercial testing company , she was told she was not a carrier , so they married . during mrs. a 's first pregnancy , she went to a hospital for antenatal care . she was informed by a visiting obstetrician that a routine test had shown her to be a carrier for sickle cell disease . she questioned the result but it was subsequently confirmed . mrs. a inquired about prenatal diagnosis ( pnd ) but was informed by her physician that at six months the pregnancy was too advanced . the child was a carrier and has remained healthy . she delivered her second child without the benefit of prenatal diagnosis . at 9 months , he was diagnosed with sickle cell disease , and at 18 months , his symptoms were treated with blood transfusion , antibiotics , and antimalarial drugs . he recovered and is receiving daily prophylactic treatment , folic acid , and vitamin b-complex tablets . the sickle cell club ( scc ) provided advice regarding the medical management of his disorder and arranged to enroll him in a well-run and highly subsidized clinic . the family remains anxious about his health and their ability to cope with the cost of frequent illness . their third child was also born without pnd . he died of an undiagnosed illness at 4 months . the child 's genotype had not been determined , but the parents feared that he might have been affected by sickle cell disease . both parents were understandably shocked and upset , and mrs. a felt guilty that her inaccurate genetic test result encouraged their marriage . mrs. a reported her fourth pregnancy early because she was , by that stage , eager to have pnd . mr. and mrs. a were not able to afford the us $ 400 fee for the test , so the scc raised sufficient funds through private donations from members to cover the cost . the couple were counseled prior to the cvs . the fetus was found to have sickle cell disease , and the couple opted for termination of pregnancy . the scc was again able to contribute part of the fee for termination . mrs. a expressed a desire to have more children , but the couple did not believe that they would be able to afford future pnd or terminations . role of a patient support organization in sickle cell disease diagnosis and treatment in nigeria continued . medical genetics services in developing countries ethical , legal , and social issues both mr. and mrs. a were certain that the marriage would not have been contracted if they had known the carrier status of mrs. a. the couple are both nigerians of igbo descent and are roman catholics , neither of which supports divorce . some churches in nigeria refuse to marry carrier couples , which can have the unintended consequence of increasing stigmatization and falsification of test results . genetic services and pnd are financially inaccessible to the majority of the population . the service is only available in lagos and is not subsidized by the government . the absence of well-regulated laboratories has also allowed for the growth of commercial laboratories , some of which are suspected of issuing inaccurate results . the scc was a valuable resource for this family in terms of coordinating funds for pnd and the abortion , as well as coordinating care for their affected son , particularly as there were no alternative services available in the public health system . a publicly available genetic testing service , with appropriate quality assurance standards , informed consent guidelines , and genetic counseling would have reduced the emotional and financial stress placed on this family . this case study illustrates a few of the many problems arising from the neglect of sickle cell disease in sub-saharan africa . the sickle cell foundation nigeria is developing a national sickle cell center , which will introduce genetic services and continue to advocate for their integration into primary health care . this study is based on information provided by dr. olu akinyanju , founder , and chairman of the sickle cell foundation , nigeria . assisting the development of patient support organizations in developing countries one program in place that could act as a model for measures to establish , support , and coordinate patient support groups in developing countries is the world federation of hemophilia ( wfh ) . the wfh is an umbrella organization that represents ... case study 4 hemophilia patient support groups globally . it runs a twinning program , where genetics clinics in developing nations are paired with clinics in developed countries for training and workshops . this allows for sharing of information about the disease , safety of treatments , care options , counseling , and prevention options . cystic fibrosis worldwide ( cfw ) is another international non-profit organization ( based in the united states ) dedicated to improving the quality of care and education for those individuals living with cystic fibrosis in developing countries . recently , cfw has commenced a project in the republic of georgia to develop sustainable delivery of clinical care , access to medicine and to facilitate the spread of education in the treatment of cf . cfw also works to promote and improve knowledge of cf among medical professionals and governments worldwide by serving as an international platform for the exchange of information . in brazil , the cf brazilian association has been influential in the development of , and active in supporting the implementation of , the national newborn screening program . despite the positive example provided by the scc and other patient/parent organizations highlighted throughout the report , patient support groups should not be seen as an alternative to the services provided by a genetic counselor . genetic counseling is a medical specialization that requires specific training , for example , in the skills required to facilitate individuals ' decision-making in a non-directive manner . however , a severe lack of genetic counselors in developing countries , even those nations with more advanced genetic services in place such as brazil and india , means that patient support groups and untrained medical staff are often called upon as the only available resource to provide genetic counseling . further , the weakness of the health care infrastructure and the lack of recognition of genetic diseases in many developing countries result in the burden of genetic counseling falling on support organizations , as they have both the experience and the motivation to assist other affected families . ideally , patient support groups would work in conjunction with a medical team , including a genetic counselor , to medical genetics services in developing countries provide the patient and family with the full spectrum of medical genetic services . conclusion genetic counseling is a specialist service that aims to foster individual autonomy during the decision-making process about the use of medical genetic services . patients ' informed and voluntary consent are a prerequisite for medical intervention , and genetic counselors help to ensure that patients understand the relevant information , including potential risks and benefits , before making a decision to undergo genetic testing . if testing is carried out , counselors are responsible for explaining to patients the results of tests and facilitating , in a non-directive manner , decision-making about the appropriate course of action for the specific patient . there are insufficient numbers of genetic counselors worldwide , but particularly in developing countries . the rapid rise in the availability of genetic tests has restricted access to genetic counseling , in many instances , to cases where genetic tests are ordered through a physician or health care provider . some countries , such as saudi arabia , are implementing interim measures to provide health care professionals and geneticists with short courses in counseling . in both developed and developing countries , patient support organizations play an important role in educating and supporting patients and affected families . this valuable resource should be acknowledged , and support groups should be encouraged to work alongside medical professionals and genetic counselors ; however , support organizations should not be viewed as an alternative to genetic counseling , which involves specialist skills and specific training . education both developed and developing countries need to improve community awareness of , and knowledge about , genetics , the relationship between genotype and phenotype , the process of genetic inheritance , and the implications of carrier status for reproductive decisions . a good education of the public supports the effectiveness of genetic services , can increase the reproductive choices available to the community , and helps to prevent discrimination and stigmatization . knowledge within a community typically varies according to class , gender , and profession , among others , as a result of differences in literacy , education , and social mobility . public education campaigns need to be cognizant of the different levels of , and barriers to , education among sub-populations within a community . in developed countries , particularly the united kingdom , the assumption that the public 's technical knowledge of science is inadequate and needs to be addressed through unidirectional education by scientists has become known as the deficit model of public understanding . in response , social scientists have sought to legitimize the relevance of lay perspectives and values and to replace the deficit model with a bidirectional dialogue model . throughout the report , we highlight the importance of inter-sectoral communications and dialogue as the basis for effective public policy . cultural and religious views about genetics and inheritance should be taken into account when developing public policy so that it is relevant and specific to the needs of a particular society . however , the following discussion about public , patient , and physician understanding of genetics in developing countries focuses on the implications of genetic knowledge for clinical and reproductive decision-making rather than policy development . education is an important tool for combating discrimination and stigmatization of genetic conditions and empowering vulnerable sections of the community . the aim of public education in genetics , in this context , is to empower people to make their own decisions in ways that maximize their well-being and health . medical genetics services in developing countries . public understanding of genetics and inheritance the lack of general education about genetics in developing countries presents a barrier to the successful implementation of genetic services . studies conducted in some developing countries demonstrate that the level of community knowledge and understanding about genetics is low . as a result , misconceptions about genetic testing services and genetic diseases are common in these populations . for programs that diagnose and treat genetic disorders to be effective , the community in which they operate must be educated about the nature of genetic diseases and how to access testing and treatment services . without such knowledge , many people may fail to receive treatment for diseases or to undergo testing for carrier status before reproducing because they are not aware that they may be at risk of passing a genetic disease on to their children or do not know where to seek medical advice . further , people may fail to seek appropriate treatment as a consequence of limited knowledge of genetic diseases . for example , it has been reported that in ecuador some people seek treatment from shamans not only because they have little understanding of genetic diseases but also because they are unaware of where to seek information or counseling in relation to the disorders . the example of screening programs in the kingdom of bahrain demonstrates how effective education campaigns can be in raising education levels and avoiding some of these problems . even when people are aware that services are available , low education levels in some developing countries and limited familiarity with genetic medicine present special obstacles to obtaining truly informed consent . as genetic services become available in developing countries , it is important to ensure that the community 's level of knowledge of genetics is sufficient to enable people to make informed autonomous decisions about their health . education should also seek to overcome the socio-cultural barriers that affect women 's ability to access medical genetic services , even when they know they exist . public education public education about genetics is an indispensable platform upon which to introduce widespread genetic testing and screening . such programs should be culturally sensitive and provide information in a manner that takes account of religious and traditional beliefs and attitudes toward medical care to effectively target information toward different sectors of the community in a way that will maximize accessibility . who experts have recommended that genetic education programs should target the general public using courses and workshops ; such education programs should be implemented in schools and community organizations . if there are social barriers preventing women or other groups from entering these public spaces and actively engaging in these activities , material will need to be delivered through other channels . education programs should start with an initial assessment of the educational requirements of different groups and the best methods for reaching target audiences . these programs should encompass the elsi of genetics , as well as providing a good understanding of the basic science of genetics and inherited disorders , dissemination approaches should take into account local literacy levels . the information should be easy to understand , and it also should be free from derogatory , guilt-provoking , or discriminatory overtones . information should also actively redress assumptions and beliefs leading to the stigmatization and discrimination of certain groups , for example , the assumption that women are to blame for the occurrence of genetic diseases in their children . major barriers to public education about genetic information are high rates of illiteracy and low standards of education , which make it difficult to communicate complex genetic concepts . these barriers typically affect women more significantly in developing countries because they often have lower rates of literacy than males . there is stigma attached to carrier status and to some medical services associated with genetic testing , like selective abortion of affected fetuses . such stigma can make the subject of genetic testing and screening taboo , resulting in a reluctance to initiate discussion about genetic disease . a lack of understanding about the relationship between individuals who have genetic diseases and those who carry the relevant allele can similarly present a barrier to effective control of genetic diseases . as with other autosomal recessive disorders , beta-thalassaemia presents challenges for genetic counselling and public education because carriers express the beta-thalassaemia trait but are apparently healthy . carriers can therefore be in denial about the implications of their carrier status for the health of their children . countries with decentralized rural populations also face geographical barriers regarding how and where to target education programmes and resources . schools are a common choice for education about early onset childhood diseases , but the proportion of children who actually attend school must also be taken into account . hospitals are another common choice since many women will access a hospital at some point during a pregnancy . however , this rules out preconception intervention , and women in rural communities may still not have access to prenatal health care services . outreach clinics and organizations will be critical in such areas . targeting education to patient support groups can be effective , as significant sections of the target population will have already been identified and have an established communication network . public education programmes , in the context of genetic screening for common recessive diseases , have been successfully implemented in cuba ( sickle cell disease ) and cyprus ( beta-thalassaemia ) , with decreases in the prevalence of each disease of 30 % and 97 % respectively . in cuba , public education was achieved through the mass media and was also targeted at women attending hospital for antenatal care . similarly , cyprus used the mass media ( tv , radio ) to improve public education , along with talks targeted to smaller groups , school education , an information booklet , and the initiation of a thalassaemia awareness week . much of the program 's success is attributed to the small population of cyprus ; in such small communities , many members of the public are in contact with an affected person , and there is therefore a good base of general awareness upon which to build education campaigns . international patient organizations such as cfw , tif , and wfh have played a key role in providing public education resources , particularly in developing countries . case study 5 provides a more detailed example of the role of education in the success of a national screening programme . interestingly , the kingdom of bahrain , like cyprus , is an island with a small population , many of whom have known an affected individual or family , and it seems likely that this geographical context plays an important role in the successful implementation of such programmes . medical genetics services in developing countries case study 5 student screening and public education in the kingdom of bahrain ministry of health , kingdom of bahrain , 1999-ongoing background a newborn screening study conducted between 1984 and 1985 in the kingdom of bahrain showed that 2.1 % of newborns had sickle cell disease , 11.2 % were carriers of the abnormal allele for sickle cell disease , and 20 % were born with glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency ( g6pd ) . a 1994 premarital counselling study further revealed that 24 % of people screened were carriers for beta-thalassaemia . description of the project the national student screening project ( nssp ) was designed to ( a ) gather epidemiological data about prevalence rates of carriers of sickle cell disease , thalassaemia , and g6pd in the community ; and ( b ) provide teenagers and their families with the opportunity to discover their carrier status for these disorders prior to making decisions about marriage and reproduction . the nssp also aimed to : raise awareness among young people about these diseases through a comprehensive education campaign , thereby empowering them to make informed reproductive decisions in the future ; establish a database registry for all screened affected students ; identify the geographic distribution of carriers of these disorders ; and identify the frequency of rare abnormal haemoglobin variants . in order to ensure equitable access to the genetic screening service , testing is offered to all students in the 11th grade of secondary school , in both public and private schools , with 7000-8000 students targeted every year . the ministry of health has provided training sessions for teachers , in addition to school nurses and doctors , who are then responsible for educating the students about these diseases through educational sessions . students and families are also supplied with information leaflets and booklets . testing is voluntary , and permission for screening is taken from parents or directly from students if they are 18 years or older . the informed consent forms contain general information about the project and a description of the benefits of the project for students . so far , approximately 80-85 % of parents or students have voluntarily agreed to be tested each year . test results are returned to students on a standardized official medical report card and are delivered via their school in a sealed envelope , with students encouraged to open their envelopes at home with their families . in order to protect privacy and confidentiality , all samples stored in the central database are anonymously coded . each school receives reports on the prevalence of the three diseases in their student body . the project takes six months on average every year for planning , education sessions , blood collection , laboratory testing , data processing , the distribution of report cards , data analysis , and delivery of results . the estimated cost per student is us $ 67 , which covers laboratory costs , human resources , and educational materials . challenges the public was initially resistant to the screening programme because they feared that girls identified as carriers would not be able to find a husband . the education campaigns therefore stressed that ( a ) all people carry some defective genes ; ( b ) carriers could avoid the risk of giving birth to an affected child if they married a non-carrier ; and ( c ) no one , including carrier-carrier couples , would be prevented from marrying . broad-based public campaigns were also required to encourage parents and students to agree to screening . the ministries of health and education were initially reluctant to prioritize genetic screening over other public health demands . however , they were convinced by epidemiological data demonstrating the high birth prevalence of the three disorders . since its inception in 1999 , the project has significantly increased awareness of the three disorders , and more than 35,000 students have been screened . this study of student screening for genetic blood diseases in the kingdom of bahrain is based on information provided by dr. shaikha al arrayed , head of the national committee for the prevention of genetic diseases . medical genetics services in developing countries the bahrain premarital screening programme and the above student screening programme , both of which included comprehensive public education programmes , have , in combination , been highly effective . the rate at birth of sickle cell disease has decreased from 2.1 % in 1984-1985 to 0.9 % in 2005 , a decrease of 60 % . health-care providers ' knowledge about genetic services education levels among health care providers also present a challenge to effective public education . primary health care providers ( general practitioners , clinic nurses ) are often poorly informed about genetic disorders and available genetic services and so are often unable to pass relevant information on to their patients . this is a problem in developed nations as well , where many general practitioners do not consistently assess genetic risk , do not refer at-risk patients to genetic services , and are not aware which services are available . education of health professionals at a local level must go hand in hand with public education in both developed and developing nations . in addition to general knowledge about genetics , health professionals ' training should include the basic principles of genetic counselling , and the primary ethical , legal , and social issues associated with medical genetic services . the who report `` genomics and world health '' noted that the information generated by genomics will , over time , aid in the treatment and prevention , not only of single-gene disorders but also of other common killers and causes of chronic disease involving significant genetic predispositions , such as cancer , cardiovascular disease , diabetes , and mental health . it is , therefore , important to stress the importance of ensuring that general medical staff have training that enables them to competently discuss with patients genetic information relevant to a wide range of pathologies . to this end , governments should ensure firstly that genetics is a component of all medical training and secondly that health professionals have regular opportunities to access continuing education to update their knowledge of genetics . patient well-being : quality assurance and patient safety patient well-being is an overarching concern that encompasses many of the issues already discussed . arguments for comprehensive treatment and prevention services are essentially about fostering patient and family well-being . in this section , we discuss two issues that are not always thought of as components of patient well-being : quality assurance standards and commercial testing . genetic testing and screening raise particular issues in relation to quality assurance and patient safety , in part due to how a community and its members understand the meaning of genetic information . while there is a common perception that genetic information differs in some ways from other medical information , there is substantial debate about the nature and degree of this difference . the knowledge that one is a carrier of a genetic disease can have implications for potential reproductive partners and future children . genetic information can indicate that a person will develop a disorder in the future , despite being currently well , as in the case of late-onset diseases such as huntington 's disease . genetic information may also indicate that a person is predisposed to developing a disorder , but because of the complex multifactorial factors involved in disease development , geneticists can not convert this knowledge into a precise outcome , only a more general risk value . genetic information about one individual can also reveal information about his or her wider family . the view that genetic information is sufficiently different from other health care information to raise unique social issues has been referred to as genetic exceptionalism . this view supports the establishment of separate regulations for managing and protecting genetic information . on the other hand , others have argued that the exceptionalism of genetic information has been exaggerated . supporters of this position argue that almost everything relevant to human health has some measure of influence by genetic factors and at the same time , very little about our health is determined only by our genome , much less by one gene . on this view , the dualism created between genetic and other medical information is unjustified and misleading . furthermore , there are multiple examples of medical tests , such as those measuring blood pressure , cholesterol level , and bone density , that provide insight into individual and familial risk of disease but have traditionally not been subject to requirements for genetic counselling or genetically oriented informed consent processes . despite this controversy , it is clear that many people believe that genetic information , because of its heritable nature , is different from other medical information and therefore find genetic information ( particularly that relating to predispositions and information that affects other family members more upsetting and challenging than other medical information . countries should determine , on an individual basis , the degree to which they believe it is necessary to introduce specific regulations relating to genetic information in order to protect patients from the harm associated with unnecessary or inaccurate genetic testing . quality and safety : quality and safety standards for genetic testing aim to ensure accuracy of results and to protect patients from the range of possible risks associated with testing . accuracy of results is particularly important given the emotional and psychological effect that testing may have on patients and their families . despite this , some countries do not have adequate systems in place to regulate and standardize laboratory practices . as a result , insufficient or incorrect information may be provided to patients . information may also not be provided in a timeframe that allows for a full range of options , interventions , or treatments . in the case of misplaced , misidentified , or mistreated samples , information may not be provided at all . quality assurance : quality assurance covers a range of aspects of testing , including the decision to test , the accuracy of results , the delivery of results , and support following that delivery . at the testing stage , protocols should regulate handling and labeling of samples , testing procedures and interpretation and recording of results , in addition to laboratory accreditation . standards should address the analytical validity , clinical validity , and clinical utility of a test . as noted in the primer of medical genetics and genetic services , analytical validity is the test 's ability to detect the trait it seeks to measure . clinical validity refers to the test 's capacity to predict a particular clinical outcome , which gives the test meaning . clinical utility refers to whether the test can provide some guidance on how to treat the disorder . for example , tests that reveal a patient has an incurable or untreatable disorder have relatively low clinical utility . where treatment options exist , a test will have high clinical utility . once testing is completed , the results should be delivered to patients again in the context of non-directive genetic counseling . patients should be assisted to select a course of treatment appropriate for them and be made aware of their reproductive options . if the test indicates that the individual is affected by the disease , he or she should be informed of the support and management structures in place for patients with the disorder . developing quality assurance standards and mechanisms . quality assurance standards and mechanisms are generally developed and implemented at the national level . they often work as a coordinated system , where national governments establish and enforce standards , while private or professional bodies conduct external quality assurance schemes in line with these standards . however , the organization for economic development and cooperation ( oecd ) and who have also been working together to establish international standards and best practices . in large part , such standards are developed in , or directed at , more developed nations . the urgent need for the introduction of mandatory quality assurance programs for diagnostic laboratories was identified as a priority issue in a recent transnational genetics workshop held in the people 's republic of china . quality assurance measures in place in developing countries : some developing countries have begun to develop mechanisms to promote quality assurance and patient safety . turkish law regulates the establishment of genetic screening centers . authorizations and licenses are issued to establish and open genetic screening centers , and there is a range of requirements relating to methods , equipment , and personnel . indian law prescribes minimum requirements for equipment and premises of genetic laboratories , genetic clinics , and genetic counseling centers , and also establishes a licensing and registration scheme for these centers , which includes requirements for obtaining informed consent . some developing countries have also laid down requirements for the licensing and training of medical practitioners and others involved in genetic testing and screening services . for example , indian law lays down minimum qualifications of employees of genetic counseling centers , genetic laboratories , and genetic clinics that provide prenatal diagnostic services . it should be acknowledged that the development of quality and safety standards is often difficult for developing countries with limited resources . countries struggling to provide sufficient genetic testing and screening services may be reluctant to fund organizations to monitor and enforce quality standards or to license laboratories . further , many developing countries lack sufficient legal specialists with skills in drafting legislation . nevertheless , appropriate legislative and regulatory frameworks are necessary to ensure those testing and screening programs that are introduced function effectively and with maximum efficiency . investing in suitable legislation can prevent the waste of resources arising as a result of unregulated laboratories and the unnecessary use of genetic tests . anti-discrimination legislation also protects vulnerable members of the community by removing the informal barriers to genetic testing that result from fear of stigmatization . such fears limit the ability of programs to reach their target populations and therefore decrease the efficiency of screening programs . as regulation and legislation are a necessary component of effective testing and screening services , the international community should consider ways of encouraging capacity building and technology transfer in relevant public policy and legislation drafting skills . commercial testing : commercial genetic testing services pose problems in both developed and developing countries , although the nature and scope of these problems may vary between the two . in general , the provision of testing services through the private sector raises concerns about the proper regulation of testing processes to ensure results are accurate and that tests have sufficient utility . specific concerns relate to the quality of informed consent , the inequality of access to genetic services within the community , the accessibility of genetic counseling , and the unnecessary use of tests in a commercial environment . lower levels of general education and lack of regulation make private sector genetic testing in the absence of fully informed consent more acute in developing countries . in some countries , private sector testing may also lead to direct marketing of tests to the public , through the internet , for example , where individuals decide , in the absence of professional health care advice and support , to undergo genetic testing . in developing countries , the establishment of commercial testing facilities raises concerns about inequality of access to genetic services . commercial genetic testing services are available in a number of developing countries , including india , brazil , chile , colombia , ecuador , and other latin american countries . in some , the private sector is relatively well developed and provides services broadly . for example , in colombia , the majority of prenatal screening is carried out in private laboratories . in other countries , however , only very limited genetic testing services are provided by either the public or private sectors . for example , in paraguay , prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis is only available in the private sector and access is limited to the wealthiest sections of the population . due to their cost , commercial genetic services are generally available to only a small minority . who experts have expressed concerns that the low priority placed on the provision of genetic services by governments in latin america and the high cost of private testing services have resulted in inequitable access in this region . access barriers due to cost are most acute where local public and private health insurance schemes do not cover the cost of testing , as is the case in brazil , colombia , ecuador , and mexico city . cost is not only a barrier to poor women but to women whose access to family resources is restricted due to cultural norms . some commercial testing services are established locally or nationally ; however , it appears that overseas companies have also shown an interest in setting up commercial testing facilities in some developing countries . in most cases , commercial genetic testing services emerge in developing countries because many such countries do not publicly fund comprehensive medical genetic services . the private sector begins to provide testing in response to demand from the wealthier sections of the communities . service provision is driven by profit , and so the more commercially profitable services , such as prenatal diagnosis , dna paternity testing , and chromosome analysis , are typically the first to be provided . for example , penchaszadeh has noted that lack of regulation in latin america has resulted in the non-critical introduction of predictive genetic testing induced by commercial interests without clinical validation . considers the provision of commercial genetic services in brazil . private commercial genetic testing , including prenatal testing , is also often subject to few if any quality control measures . when services are not provided through public organizations , the absence of direct governmental responsibility means there is less incentive for governments to ensure these private services are well regulated . some developing countries , however , have put in place measures to regulate private testing . finally , where genetic testing services are split between public and private organizations , these services may become fragmented and lack integration . for example , some private laboratories conduct newborn screening in brazil , but do not offer treatment or subsequent care . as who experts have noted , genetics services can not exist as standalone vertical structures but should be integrated with related medical services . affected individuals or parents of an affected child require access to and guidance on the range of medical specialists who should be involved in managing the disorder . it is unlikely that a purely private genetic testing service will provide access to such coordinated care . as a result of a who consultation on community genetic services in latin america , a range of recommendations were made , some of which dealt specifically with concerns about commercial testing services . first , each country should develop systems to regulate the safety and effectiveness of privately provided testing . these systems should require that commercial genetic testing services establish mechanisms to protect the privacy and confidentiality of the genetic information they generate . they should also ensure that private testing occurs only once appropriate informed consent has been obtained and should outline what constitutes informed consent . finally , countries should require commercial laboratories to provide genetic counseling before and after testing , and this counseling should be sensitive to the cultural traditions and religious beliefs of the region . commercial genetic testing services in brazil : in brazil , 42 % of medical institutions that have a genetic clinic are private , and 61 % of clinical geneticists in that country work in private clinics either part-time or full-time . however , most comprehensive genetic services ( services that encompass all or most aspects of testing , from referral for testing through to testing and post-test counseling and treatment ) are located within tertiary care public university hospitals , which act as referral centers . samples from both public and private centers are often sent to other hospitals or to other states for testing , without any proper formal controls . one study of genetic services in brazil reported that the private sector is well developed in some more affluent areas , with services that include clinical evaluation and some laboratory studies , as well as prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal and monogenic conditions . cytogenetic and molecular testing are available in the private sector in some areas . prenatal ultrasound and amniocentesis services are also offered within the private sector in some states from the south and southeast regions , including minas gerais , paraná , rio grande do sul , and rio de janeiro . it has been reported that genetic testing services in rio de janeiro are comparable in quality to those in developed countries . the genetic testing services offered in brazil are not generally comprehensive or accompanied by formal genetic counseling , and physicians with little or no training in genetics often deliver test results . predictive genetic testing is also offered by some private laboratories , although again , genetic counseling is not routinely offered , and tests may be carried out despite a lack of evidence that the test has clinical validity or utility . as most private health insurance plans in brazil do not cover private sector genetic testing , access is limited to only the small proportion of brazilians who can afford to pay for these services . the development of medical genetic services that are both publicly funded and administered is the preferred means of introducing genetic testing to a developing country because it promotes equitable access and facilitates regulation and oversight . in the absence of publicly funded genetic services , it is important for countries to regulate the conduct and standards of private testing services and laboratories . conclusion , principles , and recommendations : comprehensive and integrated treatment and prevention services are needed to effectively reduce the burden of congenital and genetic disorders . yet , in many developing countries , the level of genetic services is currently inadequate to meet population needs ; frequently , these services are available only to the wealthy , educated sectors of the community . the provision of genetic services must be weighed responsibly and fairly against the competing health needs in each country . available epidemiological data regarding the prevalence of congenital and genetic disorders , and the cost-effectiveness of control programs , indicates that many developing countries would benefit from incorporating genetic approaches into their health services . while many options for controlling congenital and genetic disorders are cost-effective , they are currently underutilized in most developing countries as means of reducing the burden of disease . in addition , there is also a significant need to develop and expand the collection of further and more detailed epidemiological data . this report has discussed the social context relevant to genetic testing and screening programs in developing countries ; identified the associated primary ethical , legal , and social issues ; and suggested principles for managing these issues effectively . responsibility for translating these principles and recommendations into specific policies , appropriate to the local context , rests with individual governments . the report has not aimed to cover all the ethical aspects of genetic testing and screening but rather to expand and enrich the discussion of some of the major ethical , legal , and social issues specific to developing countries . the report has brought together the increasing empirical evidence relating to the implementation of medical genetic services in developing countries . the primary ethical issues associated with medical genetic services in developing countries are : distributive justice ( access to necessary genetic services is inequitably restricted , usually to the wealthy sectors of the community ) , non-discrimination ( stigmatization of , and discrimination against , people with genetic disorders and carriers of recessive genetic conditions result in direct harm and act as a barrier to genetic services ) , and non-maleficence and beneficence ( appropriate safeguards to ensure quality and safety are lacking when genetic testing occurs outside of recognized genetic services , usually without adequate genetic counseling or informed consent ) . general principles : distributive justice : access to necessary genetic services is inequitably restricted , usually to the wealthy sectors of the community . evidence relating to the cost-effectiveness of medical genetic services should play an important role in health resource prioritization ; however , assumptions used in cost-effectiveness analysis and interpretation of the data generated by such analyses must be balanced against issues of equity and distributive justice . the principles of fair process should be used to ensure public endorsement of difficult decisions about rationing health care and access to medical genetic services . the development of medical genetic services that are both funded and governed publicly is the ideal manner for introducing genetic testing within countries because it promotes equitable access and facilitates regulation and oversight.genetic testing and screening programs should be supported by public education and genetic counseling : participation in all genetic testing and screening programs should be voluntary . properly informed consent is only obtained if the person understands the purpose of the test , including its benefits , risks , and possible outcomes , as well as treatment options and reproductive implications , and decides voluntarily whether to undergo testing , free from official or social pressure . autonomous decision-making regarding the use of medical genetic services depends on the availability of a range of options . optimum genetic testing , screening , and counseling can only occur where there are available and affordable resources for persons with genetic disorders . available , affordable , and safe abortion services for women who voluntarily choose to use this service should be provided . stigmatization of genetic disorders results in direct harm to those affected ; the resulting social harm and actual discrimination ( in marriage , for example ) create indirect barriers to accessing genetic services within the community . such barriers unjustly restrict access to genetic services and therefore reduce the effectiveness of testing and screening programs by limiting their ability to reach the target population . education can be a key tool in minimizing stigmatization , while regulation may be needed to combat discrimination . recommendations : education and dialogue . to ensure that health professionals have an adequate understanding of genetics and genetic services , national governments should require that genetics is a significant component of all medical training , and that health professionals have regular opportunities to access continuing education to update their knowledge about genetics , available medical genetic services , and the relevant ethical , legal , social , and human rights issues . national governments should foster dialogue and cooperation among policymakers , patients and families , clinicians , geneticists , religious leaders , and other stakeholders , to establish and implement genetic services in a manner that is culturally acceptable and maximizes the health benefit to patients . genetic counseling : it is the responsibility of national governments to ensure that genetic testing and screening programs have trained genetic counselors available to provide genetic counseling . due to the significant shortages of genetic counselors in developing countries , short-term courses should be implemented as an interim measure to increase capacity in genetic counseling . these should be directed at existing primary health care workers ( nurses , physicians , geneticists , and other health care personnel providing medical genetic services ) . graduate programs in genetic counseling , though the accepted standard in developed countries , are unlikely to be feasible for many developing countries in the short to medium term . international organizations , in collaboration with civil society and relevant experts , should develop guidelines specifying the minimum skills required for genetic counseling to assist developing countries in designing short-term training in genetic counseling in order to scale up local capacity . patient-support organizations are a valuable resource and support groups should be encouraged to work alongside medical professionals and genetic counselors ; however , support organizations should not be viewed as an alternative to genetic counseling , which involves specialist skills and specific training . discrimination : privacy , confidentiality , and anti-discrimination regulations are necessary measures to protect patients ' rights and safeguard against discrimination and stigmatization on the basis of genetic information . as there is often a discrepancy between law or policy and practice , national governments should guarantee that these regulations have appropriate enforcement mechanisms to ensure that they are put into effect . as regulation and legislation are a necessary component of effective genetic testing and screening services , the international community should provide technical assistance to build capacity , not just in medical genetics but also in public policy and legislative drafting . quality and safety : in order to foster patient well-being and protect patient safety , national governments should establish appropriate quality assurance standards ( addressing analytic validity , clinical validity , and clinical utility ) for genetic tests ; regulations requiring genetic counseling and informed consent for genetic testing and screening ; and appropriate enforcement mechanisms for the above . national governments should ensure that both publicly and privately provided genetic services are governed by appropriate regulations regarding informed consent , genetic counseling , and quality assurance . termination of affected pregnancy : evidence demonstrates that a significant proportion of couples will choose to terminate affected pregnancies . in the absence of safe abortion services , some women will resort to unsafe abortion , thereby exposing themselves to the associated medical , financial , social , and legal risks . national governments should take action to address unsafe abortion , which is a serious threat to women and women 's health . complications arising from unsafe abortion can also result in a significant burden to the public health system . in countries where abortion for fetal abnormalities is restricted or illegal , further debate is required at the academic and policy level regarding the ethical acceptability of introducing prenatal genetic testing in the absence of safe abortion services for medical purposes . patient rights : privacy and confidentiality regulations are necessary to protect patients ' rights and safeguard against potential discrimination and stigmatization . these regulations need effective enforcement mechanisms to ensure that actual practices align with law and policy . the degree to which genetic information differs from other medical information in that national context is a question for national governments to resolve in determining whether specific legislation/regulation is needed on the uses of , and confidentiality requirements for , genetic information . sex selection : the use of medical genetic services for sex determination and selective abortion of fetuses based on their sex for non-medical reasons is a serious problem in some developing countries . legislative prohibitions on this practice have so far proved ineffective . national governments must directly address gender discrimination , son preference , and the social incentives to have male children . national governments of countries where sex selection is a problem should initiate campaigns to promote equal treatment of girls and boys with respect to nutrition , health care , education , employment , inheritance rights , and social , economic , and political activity . abbreviations : achr - advisory committee on health research , aids - acquired immune deficiency syndrome , cea - cost-effectiveness analysis , cedaw - convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women , cf - cystic fibrosis , cfw - cystic fibrosis worldwide , ch - congenital hypothyroidism , cvs - chorionic villus sampling , dna - deoxyribonucleic acid , dmd - duchenne muscular dystrophy , elsi - ethical , legal and social implications , fap - familial adenomatous polyposis , gdp - gross domestic product , hiv - human immunodeficiency virus , hugo - human genome organization , ivf - in vitro fertilization , ngo - nongovernmental organization , nssp - national student screening programme ( kingdom of bahrain ) , oecd - organisation for economic development and cooperation , pgd - pre-implantation genetic diagnosis , pku - phenylketonuria , pnd - prenatal diagnosis , pntn - programa nacional de triagem neonatal ( national newborn screening program , brazil ) , rna - ribonucleic acid , scc - sickle cell club , sus - single health system ( sistema único de saúde , brazil ) , tif - thalassaemia international federation , unesco - united nations educational , scientific and cultural organization , wfh - world federation of haemophilia , who - world health organization . abortion : for the purposes of this report , the terms abortion and termination of pregnancy are used to refer to the deliberate interruption of pregnancy following the detection of fetal abnormality unless otherwise specified . alleles : alternative variants of a gene at the same chromosomal locus . amniocentesis : a test that can be performed after 14 weeks of pregnancy , where a sample of amniotic fluid containing fetal cells is taken from the womb through the abdomen of the mother to enable clinical analysis , which can include chromosomal analysis and/or genetic testing of the fetus . anencephaly : a neural tube defect in the same family of developmental disorders as spina bifida , which occurs when the cephalic or head end of the neural tube fails to close , resulting in the absence of a major portion of the brain , skull , and scalp . the infant is usually blind , deaf , unconscious , and unable to feel pain . although some individuals with anencephaly may be born with a rudimentary brain stem , the lack of a functioning cerebrum permanently rules out the possibility of ever gaining consciousness . reflex actions such as respiration ( breathing ) and responses to sound or touch may occur . aneuploidy : the occurrence of an additional or missing chromosome to give an unbalanced chromosome complement ( for example trisomy 21 , or three copies of chromosome 21 , resulting in down syndrome ) . antenatal : ( see prenatal ) . ashkenazi : a jewish community originating in eastern europe . there are a number of disease alleles that are more prevalent in the ashkenazi jewish population as compared to the general population due to endogamous marriage and founder effect in the small original population ( for example tay sachs disease and brca2-associated breast cancer ) . autosome : any of the 22 pairs of chromosomes that are not classified as sex chromosomes . carrier : a person who carries one allele ( heterozygous ) for a recessive disease and hence is not fully affected by the disease phenotype but can pass the allele on to the next generation . asymptomatic carrier : a carrier who displays none of the symptoms of the disease phenotype . carriers for most recessive diseases are asymptomatic . obligate carrier : when a person is found to be a carrier from family history alone ( for example , a person can be identified as an obligate carrier of an x-linked condition when they have both an affected sibling and an affected child ) . probable carrier : without further pedigree information , parents of affected children are considered probable carriers . carrier testing : the use of a genetic test to identify carriers . chorionic villus sampling : a procedure that can be carried out between 8 to 14 weeks of pregnancy through the vagina or through the abdomen to obtain cells of the chorion ( which will become the placenta ) to enable genetic testing of the fetus . chromosomal disorder : a disorder occurring when there is an additional or missing chromosome or section of chromosome . the genes on the chromosome are not necessarily abnormal ; it is the dosage of those genes that causes the disorder . for example , down syndrome is usually caused by the inheritance of three complete chromosomes 21. chromosomes : dna and protein , organized into distinct molecular structures , located in the nucleus of each cell . humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes . these pairs consist of one chromosome each of paternal and maternal origin . coefficient of inbreeding : the coefficient of inbreeding ( f ) is the probability that an individual with two identical alleles of the same gene received both alleles from a common ancestor . congenital disorder : any potentially pathological condition arising before birth . this includes all disorders caused by environmental , genetic , and unknown factors , whether they are evident at birth or become manifest later in life . consanguineous marriage : a marriage between people who are blood relatives . consanguineous : a genetic relationship defined as descent from at least one common ancestor . cystic fibrosis : a common autosomal recessive hereditary disease in populations of northern european origin ( birth prevalence of 1:3500 ; heterozygote frequency 1:22 ) . the cf gene encodes a membrane-bound protein that regulates a chloride ion channel designated cftr ( cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduction regulator ) . cystic fibrosis is often severe and progressive ; the average life expectancy is currently between 20-30 years . the bronchial system is especially affected . males are almost always infertile , and females are sometimes so . the sweat test is the standard diagnostic test for cf , and a high salt level is indicative of cf . treatment , depending upon the stage of the disease and the organs involved , involves clearing mucus from the lungs by chest physical therapy . diploid : a full set of genetic material , consisting of paired chromosomes , one chromosome from each parental set . most animal cells except the gametes have a diploid set of chromosomes . the diploid human genome has 46 chromosomes . dna : a polymer of subunits in human cells that comprise the genetic code . dna occurs naturally in very long paired strands that form a double helix . a gene is a length of dna that encodes a functional product ( a polypeptide or rna ) . dna microarray : a grid of nucleic acid molecules of known composition linked to a solid substrate , which can be probed with total messenger rna from a cell or tissue to reveal changes in gene expression ( i.e. , the amount of mrna produced ) relative to a control sample . microarray technology , which is also known as dna chip technology , allows the analysis of the expression of many thousands of genes by a single experiment . dominant inheritance : a single allele inherited from one parent , father or mother , is sufficient for phenotypic expression . dominant : an allele is described as dominant if it exerts its phenotypic effect when present in the heterozygous state . duchenne muscular dystrophy : an x-linked disease in which there is gradual wasting and weakening of skeletal muscles , usually affecting boys and causing early death , often before reproductive age . early-onset disorders : disorders that present symptoms between birth and early childhood , generally before reproductive age . endogamous marriage : marriage within the limits of a specific group , clan , tribe , or caste as required by custom or law . epidemiology : the study of the distribution and determinants of health-related states or events in populations and the application of these studies to control health problems . gene expression profile : a determination of the activity of many genes at the same time in a particular tissue , usually measured by the presence of their rna in microarray analysis . gene mutations : structural changes in the dna sequence of a gene resulting from uncorrected errors during dna replication . genes : units of hereditary information that are composed of dna , encode a functional product , and are located on chromosomes . genetic counselling : the process by which individuals or families at risk of a disorder that may be hereditary are advised of the consequences of the disorder , the probability of developing or transmitting it , and the ways in which this may be prevented , avoided , or ameliorated , in a respectful , non-directive , and confidential manner . genetic drift : cumulative changes in gene frequency over successive generations because of chance fluctuations ; this may eventually result in certain alleles being completely lost from a population . genetic test : a laboratory test that analyses a particular configuration of the genetic material , be it ( a ) by direct analysis at the level of a gene or a chromosome or ( b ) by testing a direct gene product ( such as rna , a structural protein , or an enzyme or key metabolite ) . genetic testing : testing offered to people already known to be at increased genetic risk ( e.g. , the partner of a carrier of a haemoglobin disorder , an older pregnant woman , a woman with a fetus with increased nuchal translucency , a biological relative of a person with a genetic condition ) in order to achieve a definitive diagnosis of a genetic condition or state of risk . genetics : the study of heredity , or the transmission of genetic factors from one generation to the next , and of the variation within those factors . genome : with respect to humans , the genome is the sum total of the genetic material present in an individual , including dna present in the chromosomes and that in the mitochondria . genomic epidemiology : the branch of medical science that deals with the study of genes and their functions in relation to the incidence and distribution of disease in a population . genomics : the study of the genome and its action . genotype : the total genetic constitution of an individual . haemoglobin : the molecule in red blood cells that transports oxygen from the lungs to body tissues . haemoglobinopathies : inherited disorders of haemoglobin , including thalassaemia and sickle cell disease , among others . haemophilia : the first major disease recognized as being genetically determined , haemophilia is a classic example of x-chromosomal inheritance , occurring with a frequency of about 1:10 , 000 male newborns . haemophilia a is a hereditary blood disorder characterized by a deficiency of the blood clotting protein factor viii that results in abnormal bleeding . haemophilia b results from a deficiency of factor ix . factor viii ( synthesized mainly in the liver ) is one of the many factors involved in blood coagulation . the severity of haemophilia and the frequency of bleeding depend upon the degree of residual factor viii or factor ix activity . haploid : a single set of chromosomes ( half the full set of genetic material ) , present in the egg and sperm cells of animals . human beings have 23 chromosomes in their reproductive cells . hereditary : the passing of characteristics genetically from one generation to the next , from parent to offspring . heterozygote : a heterozygote has a different allelic form of a specific gene on each of the pair of chromosomes ( often represented as hh ) . homologous chromosomes : a pair of chromosomes in which one member of the pair is obtained from the organism 's maternal parent and the other from the paternal parent ; found in diploid cells . these are also commonly referred to as homologues . homozygote : a homozygote has the same allelic form of a specific gene on each of the pair of chromosomes ( often represented as hh or hh ) . in vitro fertilization ( ivf ) : a laboratory procedure in which eggs and sperm harvested from the parents are combined outside the body resulting in fertilized eggs that can later be replaced in the uterus to complete embryonic and fetal development . with a risk of chromosomal disorders in the offspring , this risk factor is often referred to as advanced maternal age and is generally considered to be over the age of 35 years , when the risk of these disorders begins to increase exponentially . mendelian disorder : disorders that respond to the genetic laws of dominant and recessive inheritance discovered by the monk gregor mendel in peas in the nineteenth century . see monogenic disorder . mitochondria : cellular organelles present in eukaryotic organisms that enable aerobic respiration , which generates the energy to drive cellular processes . each mitochondrion contains a small amount of dna encoding 37 genes . molecular epidemiology : the branch of medical science that deals with the incidence , distribution , and control of disease in a population through identification and characterization of certain molecules and gene sequences . monogenic disorders : see mendelian disorder . multifactorial disorders : disorders whose pathology is dependent on the complex interplay of several genetic and environmental factors . non-disjunction : an error in cell division where the chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis , so that both pass to the same daughter cell . nucleotides : biochemical molecules ( bases ) from which dna and rna molecules are assembled . penetrance : the probability that a genetic trait will be expressed . an allele may have complete or incomplete penetrance . the latter refers to cases where having the particular allele leads to a less than 100 % likelihood of manifesting the phenotype . perinatal : relating to or occurring during the period around childbirth , specifically from around week 28 of pregnancy to around one month after birth . phenotype : the visible properties of an organism produced by its genotype in interaction with the environment ; the clinical presentation of a specific disorder . see genotype . phenylketonuria ( pku ) : an early-onset disease in which the body lacks the enzyme to metabolize dietary phenylalanine to tyrosine , which results in a toxic by-product that causes developmental deficiency , seizures , and tumors . polygenic : involving more than one gene . see multifactorial disorder . polymerase chain reaction ( pcr ) : a molecular biology technique developed in the mid-1980s and now one of the most widespread dna technologies , through which specific dna segments may be selectively amplified . polypeptide : a single chain of covalently attached amino acids joined by peptide bonds . polypeptide chains usually fold into a compact , stable form that is part ( or all ) of the final protein . postnatal : occurring immediately or soon after childbirth . predictive testing : see presymptomatic testing . predisposition genetic testing : analysis of a genotype to ascertain whether there is an increased risk of disease . while the genotype alone may be insufficient to cause the disease , impaired expression of alleles and/or environmental factors may be necessary conditions for the disease . pre-implantation genetic diagnosis : genetic testing of embryos created through ivf to identify those at risk of a particular condition . prenatal diagnosis : diagnostic investigations that are performed during fetal development . prenatal : existing or happening during pregnancy but before childbirth . presymptomatic testing : detection of late-onset diseases that develop in adults , identifying either a predisposition to disease or making a definitive diagnosis . protein : biological effector molecules encoded by an organism 's genome . a protein consists of one or more polypeptide chains of amino acid subunits . the functional action of a protein depends on its three-dimensional structure , which is determined by its amino acid composition . recessive inheritance : two abnormal alleles ( if fully penetrant ) must be inherited from each parent for full phenotypic expression in the offspring . recessive : an allele ( if fully penetrant ) is described as recessive if it must be homozygous to confer the full phenotypic effect . see recessive inheritance . screening : the systematic application of a test or inquiry to identify individuals at sufficient risk of a specific disorder , to benefit from further investigation or direct preventive action , among people who have not sought medical attention for the symptoms of that disorder . newborn screening : screening of all newborns in a population for prevalent diseases , including genetic diseases , that can be ameliorated or prevented by treatment from birth or shortly thereafter . carrier screening : isolation of potential carriers from a larger population for further testing and genetic counseling for family planning . genetic screening : a basic test that is systematically offered to a defined population to identify a group at increased genetic risk , which may then be offered further tests that enable a definitive diagnosis . family-based screening : genetic screening offered to relatives of a person identified as carrying a disease-causing gene mutation . when a carrier is detected , further testing is then offered to their relatives . premarital screening : the screening of couples prior to marriage for carrier status for common recessive disorders , which could result in their producing affected offspring . sex chromosome : the pair of chromosomes that determines the sex of an individual ( xx for females and xy for males ) . sex selection : identification and selective termination of pregnancies on the basis of sex , for medical or non-medical purposes . sickle cell disease : an inherited disorder caused by defects in the hemoglobin gene . the disorder produces abnormal hemoglobin , which causes the red blood cells to sickle or become crescent-shaped . the rapid breakdown of sickle-shaped red blood cells causes a decrease in red blood cells ( anemia ) and jaundice . other clinical features include pulmonary hypertension , infections , and periodic episodes of pain caused by oxygen deprivation in tissues . symptoms usually begin in early childhood and can vary from mild to severe . sickle cell anemia affects millions of people worldwide and is most common in africa , the arabian peninsula , and india . sickle cell disease is also frequent in countries where people of african descent live ( such as the united states ) . the condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . carrier status also confers some resistance to malaria . sporadic genetic mutation : in terms of genetics , sporadic describes new mutations that cause disease , occurring either in a germ cell or somatic cell of an individual at any stage of life and are therefore not present in the parents . also called de novo mutations . tay-sachs disease : a rare autosomal recessive disorder that causes the accumulation of lipids , resulting in progressive destruction of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord . the most common form begins in infancy . an infant with the disorder appears normal until the age of 3 to 6 months , when development slows , and the baby is often unable to crawl , turn over , or grasp objects . as the disease progresses , infants develop seizures , vision and hearing loss , mental retardation , and paralysis . children with this severe form of tay-sachs disease have a life expectancy of about 14 years . tay-sachs disease is more common in people of ashkenazi jewish heritage . termination of pregnancy : see abortion . thalassaemia : a group of hereditary forms of anemia caused by a reduction in , or lack of , synthesis of the globin chains ( most commonly alpha or beta chains ) that form the red blood pigment hemoglobin . carriers may also show mild hematological symptoms . the condition was first described in mediterranean populations ; however , it is also prevalent in africa , the middle east , and asia . this group of disorders may range from mild blood abnormalities to severe or fatal anemia . adult hemoglobin is composed of two alpha and two polypeptide chains . in alpha-thalassaemia , there is deficient synthesis of alpha-chains . in beta-thalassaemia , there is a defect of beta-chains . currently , severe thalassaemia is treated by blood transfusions , and a minority of patients are cured by bone marrow transplantation . this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern . carrier status also confers some resistance to malaria . trisomy 18 ( also edwards syndrome ) : a chromosomal condition that occurs when there are three copies of chromosome 18 in each cell instead of two . trisomy 18 confers an extremely high mortality rate , with about 90-95 % mortality within the first year of life . this condition is characterized by low birth weight , a small , abnormally shaped head , clenched fists with overlapping fingers , mental retardation , heart defects , and other organ malformations . trisomy 18 affects about 1 in 5000 to 6000 live births . approximately 80 % of cases are female . the risk of having a child with trisomy 18 increases with maternal age . trisomy 13 ( also patau syndrome ) : a chromosomal condition that occurs when there are three copies of chromosome 13 instead of two . trisomy 13 is associated with severe mental retardation , small eyes that may exhibit a split in the iris ( coloboma ) , a cleft lip and/or palate , weak muscle tone ( hypotonia ) , an increased risk of heart defects , skeletal abnormalities , and other medical problems . affected individuals rarely live past infancy . trisomy 13 affects approximately 1 in 10,000 live births . the risk of having a child with trisomy 13 increases with maternal age . ultrasound : an imaging method in which high-frequency sound waves are used to outline a part of the body . the sound wave echoes are picked up and displayed on a television screen . this test is used to monitor pregnancy and to identify some congenital disorders . x-linked inheritance : the gene in question is situated on the x chromosome . in the context of disease , the inheritance is normally recessive and leads to disease in boys , since they only have one x chromosome , and there is generally no equivalent gene locus on the y chromosome . women who are carriers have a disease allele on one x chromosome and a normal allele on the other , and so do not usually express the disease . in some cases , however , the carrier may show mild or even severe forms of the disorder . learn about diabetes you can learn how to take care of your diabetes and prevent some of the serious problems diabetes can cause . the more you know , the better you can manage your diabetes . make sure to ask your healthcare team any questions you might have . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . your pancreas an organ , located between your stomach and spine , that helps with digestion releases a hormone it makes , called insulin , into your blood . insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your body 's cells . sometimes your body does n't make enough insulin , or the insulin does n't work the way it should . glucose then stays in your blood and does n't reach your cells . your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . what is prediabetes ? prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . with prediabetes , your chances of getting type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke are higher . with some weight loss and moderate physical activity , you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you can even return to normal glucose levels , possibly without taking any medicines . what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? the signs and symptoms of diabetes are being very thirsty , urinating often , feeling very hungry , feeling very tired , losing weight without trying , sores that heal slowly , dry and itchy skin , feelings of pins and needles in your feet , losing feeling in your feet , blurry eyesight . some people with diabetes don ’ t have any of these signs or symptoms . the only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test . what kind of diabetes do you have ? the three main types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . people can develop diabetes at any age . both women and men can develop diabetes . type 1 diabetes , which used to be called juvenile diabetes , develops most often in young people ; however , type 1 diabetes can also develop in adults . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin because the body 's immune system , which normally protects you from infection by getting rid of bacteria , viruses , and other harmful substances , has attacked , and destroyed the cells that make insulin . treatment for type 1 diabetes includes taking shots , also called injections , of insulin . sometimes taking medicines by mouth . making healthy food choices . being physically active . controlling your blood pressure levels . blood pressure is the force of blood flow inside your blood vessels . controlling your cholesterol levels . cholesterol is a type of fat in your body 's cells , in your blood , and in many foods . type 2 diabetes , which used to be called adult-onset diabetes , can affect people at any age , even children . however , type 2 diabetes develops most often in middle- aged and older people . people who are overweight and inactive are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance a condition that occurs when fat , muscle , and liver cells do not use insulin to carry glucose into the body 's cells to use for energy . as a result , the body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas keeps up with the added demand by making more insulin . over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . if your pancreas can no longer make enough insulin , you will need to treat your type 2 diabetes . treatment for type 2 diabetes includes using diabetes medicines making healthy food choices being physically active controlling your blood pressure levels controlling your cholesterol levels gestational diabetes gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . all women have insulin resistance late in their pregnancy . if the pancreas does n't make enough insulin during pregnancy , a woman develops gestational diabetes . overweight or obese women have a higher chance of gestational diabetes . also , gaining too much weight during pregnancy may increase your likelihood of developing gestational diabetes . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . however , a woman who has had gestational diabetes is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes later in life . babies born to mothers who had gestational diabetes are also more likely to develop obesity and type 2 diabetes . why do you need to take care of your diabetes ? over time , diabetes can lead to serious problems with your blood vessels , heart , nerves , kidneys , mouth , eyes , and feet . these problems can lead to an amputation , which is surgery to remove a damaged toe , foot , or leg , for example . the most serious problem caused by diabetes is heart disease . when you have diabetes , you are more than twice as likely as people without diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke . with diabetes , you may not have the usual signs or symptoms of a heart attack . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your healthcare team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . who is part of your healthcare team ? most people with diabetes get care from primary care providers , such as internists , family physicians , or pediatricians . a team of health care providers can also improve your diabetes care . in addition to a primary care provider , your healthcare team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care a dietitian , a nurse , or a certified diabetes educator expert who can provide information about managing diabetes a counselor or mental health professional a pharmacist a dentist an ophthalmologist or an optometrist for eye care a podiatrist for foot care if diabetes makes you feel sad or angry , or if you have other problems that worry you , you should talk with a counselor or mental health professional . your doctor or certified diabetes educator can help you find a counselor . talk with your doctor about what vaccines and immunizations , or shots , you should get to keep from getting sick . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your healthcare team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . be sure you understand everything you need to know about taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your healthcare team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . take care of your diabetes each day do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . these things may seem like a lot to do at first . just make small changes until these steps become a normal part of your day . follow your healthy eating plan ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . this plan , often called medical nutrition therapy , will include regular monitoring by your dietitian and education about how to adjust your eating habits as the need occurs . medical nutrition therapy is usually covered by insurance or medicare as long as your doctor refers you . your dietitian can help you plan meals that include foods that you and your family like and that are good for you . your healthy eating plan will include breads , cereals , rice , and whole grains fruits and vegetables meat and meat substitutes dairy products healthy fats your plan will also help you learn how to eat the right amount , or portions , of food . making good food choices will help you reach and stay at a healthy weight keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels under control prevent heart and blood vessel disease if you take insulin , look at the white boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . do n't skip meals , especially if you 've already taken your insulin , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . learn more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . eat several small meals during the day instead of big meals . be physically active , physical activity helps you stay healthy . physical activity is especially good if you have diabetes because it helps you reach or stay at a healthy weight . it helps insulin work better to lower your blood glucose levels is good for your heart and lungs gives you more energy even small amounts of physical activity help manage diabetes , such as when you are physically active at work or home . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . not all physical activity has to take place at the same time . increase daily activity by decreasing time spent watching tv or at the computer . children and adolescents should limit screen time not related to school to less than 2 hours a day . limiting screen time can help you meet your physical activity goal . people with diabetes should always talk with a doctor before starting a new physical activity program . do aerobic activities , such as brisk walking , which use the body 's large muscles to make the heartbeat faster . the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head , shoulder , and hip movements . do activities to strengthen muscles and bone , such as sit-ups or lifting weights . aim for two times a week . stretch to increase flexibility , lower stress , and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity . many activities can help your child and your family stay active and have fun . consider activities that they might enjoy and can stick with , such as playing basketball dancing to music with friends taking a walk or a bike ride physical activity helps you stay healthy . action steps if you take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . don ’ t start a physical activity program when your blood glucose levels are high or if you have ketones in your blood or urine . don ’ t be physically active right before you go to bed because it could cause low blood glucose while you sleep . action steps if you do n't take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . ask your doctor about whether you need to eat before you are physically active . when you are being physically active , carry glucose tablets or a carbohydrate-rich snack or drink with you , such as fruit or juice , in case your blood glucose levels go too low . take your medicines as prescribed if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . diabetes medicines most people with type 2 diabetes use medicines other than insulin shots . people with type 2 diabetes use medicine to help their blood glucose levels stay in their target range . if your body makes insulin and the insulin does n't lower your blood glucose levels enough , you may need to take one or more medicines . diabetes medicines come in pill and shot form . some people take diabetes medicines once a day and other medicines more often . ask your healthcare team when you should take your diabetes medicines . sometimes , people who take diabetes medicines may also need insulin shots for a while . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . if you get sick or have surgery , your diabetes medicines may no longer work to lower your blood glucose levels . always check with your doctor before you stop taking your diabetes medicines . insulin shots only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take and which of the following ways to take insulin is best for you : insulin shot . you ’ ll use a needle attached to a syringe a hollow tube with a plunger that you fill with a dose of insulin . some people use an insulin pen , a pen like device with a needle and a cartridge of insulin . never share insulin needles or insulin pens , even with family . insulin pump . an insulin pump is a small device filled with insulin that you wear on your belt or keep in your pocket . the pump connects to a small , plastic tube and a small needle . you or your doctor inserts the needle under your skin . the needle can stay in for several days . insulin jet injector . this device sends a fine spray of insulin through your skin with high-pressure air instead of a needle . insulin injection port . you or your doctor inserts a small tube just beneath your skin , where it remains in place for several days . you can inject insulin into the end of the tube instead of through your skin . only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take . other medicines your doctor may prescribe other medicines to help with problems related to diabetes , such as aspirin for heart health cholesterol-lowering medicines medicines for high blood pressure remembering to take your medicines at the correct times each day can be challenging . many people find that keeping a weekly pill box with separate boxes for each day , and even separate boxes for morning and evening , can help . also ask your healthcare team to update your list of medicines at each visit so you always have an accurate list of what medicines to take and when . check your blood glucose levels checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . if your blood has too much or too little glucose , you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . a member of your healthcare team will show you how to check your blood glucose levels using a blood glucose meter . your healthcare team can teach you how to prick your finger to get a drop of blood for testing . your health insurance or medicare may pay for the blood glucose meter and test strips you need . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check before and after eating , before and after physical activity , before bed , and sometimes in the middle of the night . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . target range for blood glucose levels most people with diabetes should try to keep their blood glucose levels as close as possible to the level of someone who does n't have diabetes . this normal target range is about 70 to 130. the closer to normal your blood glucose levels are , the lower your chance of developing serious health problems . ask your doctor what your target levels are and when you should check your blood glucose levels with a meter . make copies of the chart in the section your diabetes care records to take with you when you visit your doctor . reaching your target range all of the time can be hard . remember , the closer you get to your target range , the better you will feel . the a1c test another test for blood glucose , the a1c also called the hemoglobin a1c test , hb a1c , or glycohemoglobin test is a blood test that reflects the average level of glucose in your blood during the past 2 to 3 months . you should have the a1c test at least twice a year . if your result is not on target , your doctor may have you take the test more often to see if your a1c improves . for the test , your doctor will draw a sample of your blood during an office visit or send you to a lab to have your blood drawn . your a1c test result is given as a percentage . your a1c result plus the record of your blood glucose numbers show whether your blood glucose levels are under control . if your a1c result is too high , you may need to change your diabetes treatment plan . your health care team can help you decide what part of your plan to change . if your a1c result is on target , then your diabetes treatment plan is working . the lower your a1c result , the lower your chance of having diabetes problems . talk with your doctor about what your a1c target should be . your personal target may be above or below the target shown in the chart . a1c targets target for most people with diabetes below 7 percent time to change my diabetes care plan 8 percent or above a1c targets can also depend on how long you have had diabetes whether or not you have other health problems . tests for ketones you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. your body makes ketones when you burn fat instead of glucose for energy . if you have too many ketones , you are more likely to have a serious condition called ketoacidosis . if not treated , ketoacidosis can cause death . signs of ketoacidosis are vomiting weakness fast breathing sweet-smelling breath ketoacidosis is more likely in people with type 1 diabetes . your doctor or diabetes educator will show you how to test for ketones . keep daily records make copies of the daily diabetes record at the end of this booklet . then , write down the results of your blood glucose checks each day . you may also want to record what you ate , how you felt , and whether you were physically active . bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . they can use your records to see whether you need changes in your diabetes medicines or in your healthy eating plan . action steps if you take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take insulin the amount and type of insulin you take what types of physical activity you do and for how long when and what you eat whether you have ketones in your blood or urine when you are sick action steps if you do n't take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take your medicines what types of physical activity you do and for how long learn about high and low blood glucose levels sometimes , no matter how hard you try to keep your blood glucose levels in your target range , they will be too high or too low . blood glucose that too high or too low can make you feel sick . if you try to control your high or low blood glucose and ca n't , you may become even sicker and need help . talk with your doctor to learn how to handle these emergencies . learn about high blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . high blood glucose can happen if you miss taking your diabetes medicines eat too much do n't get enough physical activity have an infection get sick are stressed take medicines that can cause high blood glucose be sure to tell your doctor about other medicines you take . when you 're sick , be sure to check your blood glucose levels and keep taking your diabetes medicines . read more about how to take care of yourself when you 're sick in the section take care of your diabetes during special times or events . signs that your blood glucose levels may be too high are the following : feeling thirsty , feeling weak or tired , headaches , urinating often , having trouble paying attention , blurry vision , yeast infections . very high blood glucose may also make you feel sick to your stomach . if your blood glucose levels are high much of the time , or if you have symptoms of high blood glucose , call your doctor . you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . low blood glucose can come on fast and can be caused by taking too much diabetes medicine missing or delaying a meal being more physically active than usual drinking alcoholic beverages sometimes , medicines you take for other health problems can cause your blood glucose levels to drop . signs your blood glucose levels may be too low are the following : hunger , dizziness or shakiness , confusion , being pale , sweating more , weakness , anxiety or moodiness , headaches , a fast heartbeat . if your blood glucose levels drop lower , you could have severe hypoglycemia , where you pass out or have a seizure . a seizure occurs when cells in the brain release a rush of energy that can cause changes in behavior or muscle contractions . some seizures are life-threatening . if you have any of these symptoms , check your blood glucose levels . if your blood glucose levels are less than 70 , have one of the following right away : three or four glucose tablets one serving of glucose gel the amount equal to 15 grams of carbohydrates 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of fruit juice 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of a regular non-diet soft drink 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of milk five or six pieces of hard candy 1 tablespoon of sugar , syrup , or honey have one of these foods or drinks when your blood glucose levels are low . after 15 minutes , check your blood glucose levels again . repeat these steps until your blood glucose levels are 70 or above . if it will be at least 1 hour before your next meal , eat a snack . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . a glucagon kit has a vial of glucagon , a syringe , and a needle to inject the glucagon . given as a shot , the glucagon quickly raises blood glucose . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you 'll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon kit is not available . action steps if you take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor if you 've passed out from low blood glucose . ask your doctor about glucagon . glucagon is a medicine that raises blood glucose . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . when you have severe hypoglycemia , someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon shot is not available . action steps if you do n't take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor about other medicines you are taking . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicines might cause low blood glucose . tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of day or night , several times in a row . prevent diabetes problems taking care of your diabetes every day will help your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels stay in your target ranges . caring for your diabetes can also help prevent other health problems over the years . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . types of diabetes problems diabetes problems can damage parts of the body such as the heart blood vessels eyes kidneys nerves heart and blood vessel disease can lead to heart attacks and strokes . nerve damage can lead to a loss of feeling in the feet , which may lead to an amputation . you will want to take steps to prevent these diabetes problems . you can learn how to take care of yourself and your diabetes when you 're sick , when you 're at school or work , when you ’ re away from home , when an emergency or a natural disaster happens , or when you ’ re thinking about having a baby or are pregnant . when you 're sick having a cold , the flu , or an infection can raise your blood glucose levels . being sick puts stress on your body . your body releases hormones to deal with the stress and to fight the sickness . higher hormone levels can also cause high blood glucose levels . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . the first step is to talk with your health care team and write down how often to check your blood glucose levels whether you should check for ketones in your blood or urine whether you should change your usual dose of your diabetes medicines what to eat and drink when to call your doctor action steps if you take insulin take your insulin , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . ask your healthcare team about how to adjust your insulin dose based on your blood glucose test results . action steps if you do n't take insulin take your diabetes medicines , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . people who are sick sometimes feel as though they can ’ t eat as much or ca n't keep food down , which can cause low blood glucose levels . consuming carbohydrate-rich drinks or snacks can help prevent low blood glucose . if you are sick , your healthcare team may recommend the following : check your blood glucose levels at least four times a day and write down the results in your record book . keep your results handy so you can report the results to your healthcare team . keep taking your diabetes medicines , even if you ca n't eat . drink at least 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of water or other calorie-free , caffeine-free liquid every hour while you 're awake . if you can ’ t eat your usual food , try eating or drinking any of the following to prevent low blood glucose levels : juice saltine crackers dry toast soup broth or bouillon ice pops or sherbet gelatin that is n't sugar-free milk yogurt soda that is n't sugar-free your doctor may ask that you call right away if your blood glucose levels are above 240 even though you 've taken your diabetes medicines your urine or blood ketone levels are above normal you vomit more than once you have diarrhea for more than 6 hours you have trouble breathing you have a high fever you can ’ t think clearly or you feel more drowsy than usual you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . when you 're at school or work take care of your diabetes when you 're at school or at work : follow your healthy eating plan . take your medicines and check your blood glucose levels as usual . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . keep snacks nearby and carry some with you at all times to treat low blood glucose . if you have trained diabetes staff at your school or work , tell them that you have diabetes . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . when you 're away from home these tips can help you when you ’ re away from home : get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . follow your healthy eating plan as much as possible when you eat out . always carry a snack with you in case you have to wait for a waiter to serve you . limit alcoholic beverages . ask your healthcare team how many alcoholic beverages you can safely drink . eat something when you drink to prevent low blood glucose . if you ’ re taking a long trip by car , check your blood glucose levels before driving . stop and check your blood glucose levels every 2 hours . always carry your diabetes medicines and supplies in the car where you can reach them in case your blood glucose levels drop too low . in case you can ’ t leave for home on time , bring twice the amount of diabetes supplies and medicines you normally need . take comfortable , well-fitting shoes on vacation . you 'll probably be walking more than usual . keep your medical insurance card , emergency phone numbers , and a first aid kit handy . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . if you ’ re going to be away for a long time , ask your doctor for a written prescription for your diabetes medicines and the name of a doctor in the place you ’ re going to visit . don ’ t count on buying extra supplies when you 're traveling , especially if you 're going to another country . different countries use different kinds of diabetes medicines . when you 're flying on a plane these tips can help you when you ’ re flying on a plane : ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines , especially your insulin , if you 're traveling across time zones . take a letter from your doctor stating you have diabetes . the letter should include a list of all the medical supplies and medicines you need on the plane . in the letter , the doctor should also include a list of any devices that shouldn ’ t go through an x-ray machine . carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . if you use an insulin pump , ask airport security to check the device by hand . x-ray machines can damage insulin pumps , whether the pump is on your body or in your luggage . when on a plane , get up from your seat and walk around when possible . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . action steps if you take insulin when you travel , take a special insulated bag to carry your insulin to keep it from freezing or getting too hot bring extra supplies for taking insulin and testing your blood glucose levels in case of loss or breakage ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for taking insulin and testing blood glucose action steps if you don ’ t take insulin when you travel , ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines if you ’ re traveling across time zones carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for testing blood glucose when an emergency or a natural disaster happens everyone with diabetes should be prepared for emergencies and natural disasters , such as power outages or hurricanes . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes , such as a blood glucose meter , lancets , and testing strips your diabetes medicines insulin , syringes , and an insulated bag to keep insulin cool , if you take insulin a glucagon kit if you take insulin or if recommended by your doctor glucose tablets and other food or drinks to treat low blood glucose antibiotic cream or ointment a copy of your medical information , including a list of your conditions , medicines , and recent lab test results a list of your prescription names with dosage information and prescription numbers from your pharmacy phone numbers for the american red cross and other disaster relief groups you also might want to include some food that does n't spoil , such as canned or dried food , along with bottled water . if you 're a woman and planning a pregnancy keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . even before you become pregnant , your blood glucose levels should be close to the normal range . your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you 're already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . you can take steps to bring your blood glucose levels close to normal . your insulin needs may change when you ’ re pregnant . your doctor may want you to take more insulin and check your blood glucose levels more often . if you plan to have a baby , work with your health care team to get your blood glucose levels as close to the normal range as possible see a doctor who has experience taking care of pregnant women with diabetes don ’ t smoke , drink alcoholic beverages , or use harmful drugs follow your healthy eating plan be sure to have your eyes , heart and blood vessels , blood pressure , and kidneys checked . your doctor should also check for nerve damage . pregnancy can make some health problems worse . if you ’ re already pregnant , see your doctor right away . points to remember diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin . type 2 diabetes develops when , over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . people who are overweight and inactive are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your healthcare team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . when you see members of your healthcare team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . ask your healthcare team when you should take your diabetes medicines . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you 'll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . when traveling , carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes in the disaster kit . keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . if you ’ re already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas is unable to produce enough insulin , or when the body cells can not make proper use of the insulin produced , due to reduced sensitivity . diabetes is an important cause for morbidity in malta with around per cent of the population above 18 years estimated to be living with this condition , a proportion of whom are undiagnosed . the incidence in malta is expected to continue rising in all age groups , making diabetes a growing health problem . diabetes has a significant impact on the quality of life of persons with diabetes and their families , especially when complications arise . the high burden of diabetes among the maltese population calls for a national diabetes strategy . the overall aim of this strategy is to emphasize prevention and early diagnosis of diabetes , expand treatment options and further develop the integrated care and management of diabetes so as to prevent or postpone complications . support for persons with diabetes and their families at all stages is considered an important aspect of the service framework being proposed . many of the risk factors leading to type 2 diabetes , which is the common form of diabetes , are modifiable . examples are obesity , unhealthy diet , physical inactivity and smoking . evidence has shown that in the case of diabetes prevention , measures do work and that the onset of diabetes can be prevented or postponed if a healthier lifestyle were to be adopted . prevention strategies require a whole of society approach in order to succeed . a higher level of public awareness about diabetes and measures to avoid type 2 diabetes is necessary . educating the public about diabetes , its risk and seriousness and promoting a healthy lifestyle could potentially avert the projected increase in diabetes incidence . diagnosing diabetes in its early stages or in the so-called pre-diabetic stage may delay the onset of diabetes and is important to reduce the risk of complications . the provision of care for individuals with diabetes involves various professionals . the diabetes clinic at mater dei hospital is the hub for specialist care of persons with diabetes . over the years , a shared care programme has been developed in partnership with the health centres primarily to offer care and support for persons with uncomplicated type 2 diabetes . this strategy proposes to continue to build on the strengths of the existing clinical care programmes whilst seeking to address the gaps that have been identified . in order to attain consistent high quality outcomes the government will continue to invest in trained human resources . this will enable strengthening of the multi-disciplinary team approach particularly in those professions where critical shortages are known to exist . health care professionals will be empowered and equipped to offer care in line with a national service framework . the aim is to ensure that patients receive optimal care in all healthcare settings since it is recognized that the private sector also plays an important role in the care of persons with diabetes . for high standards of care to be achieved , government will increase its investment in innovative treatment using a phased approach . the key emphasis in both children and adults will be primarily geared towards preventing complications through risk factor modification and control . this will be complemented by setting up of screening and follow-up facilitated by the necessary information systems , for the early detection of complications at a stage where they are amendable to effective intervention . patient self-management is a key skill to effectively manage and care for diabetes . it requires patients to understand and know their health condition and to be able to independently control their blood glucose levels . this strategy addresses self-management by placing the patients in the centre of healthcare . it includes actions on patient empowerment , education , health literacy , accessibility of medicines and supplies for self-monitoring . government will work in partnership with ngos to implement stronger patient empowerment . in order to tackle the burden of diabetes effectively , comprehensive and complete information regarding the epidemiology of the disease is necessary . the updated strategic plan is built on the proposal for consultation launched in november . priority initiatives have been identified taking into account the feedback received during the public consultation process . the government is presenting the first ever national strategy for diabetes in line with its electoral programme proposal to bring about improvement in the quality of life for persons with diabetes and their families . chapter 1 : introduction to the national diabetes strategy 2016-2020. what is diabetes ? according to the world health organization ( who ) , 347 million people worldwide have diabetes , and the prevalence is rising faster than expected ( who , 2013 ) . diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that occurs when the body 's response to insulin is diminished , either due to reduced sensitivity to insulin or due to reduced production of insulin . insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas that regulates blood sugar concentration when this rises after a meal or decreases while fasting . large swings in sugar concentration are detrimental to health and lead to both short- and long-term effects . hyperglycemia , or raised blood sugar , may seriously damage body tissues such as the kidneys , nerves , and blood vessels , especially when this has been ongoing for a long time . hypoglycemia or reduced blood sugar causes the brain to cease functioning properly , and unless corrected immediately may lead to coma and eventually death . types of diabetes mellitus . type 1 diabetes : this is caused by the body 's immune system destroying insulin-producing cells in the pancreas . this leads to a reduction in the potential for the body to produce insulin requiring administration of insulin ( injected ) . type 2 diabetes : in this type of diabetes , there is a gradual increase in resistance of the body ’ s tissues to the effects of insulin . there is a more gradual onset than type 1 diabetes ( t1dm ) and is most common in middle-aged and elderly , however , it is becoming more common in younger people too . there are a number of modifiable risk factors for type 2 diabetes ( t2dm ) including obesity , smoking , and inactivity . hence , apart from starting oral hypoglycemic agents , first-line management includes dietary changes and exercise . gestational diabetes : this is the onset of diabetes during pregnancy in an individual with no previously known diabetes but certain risk factors such as obesity and smoking . this is caused by insulin resistance during pregnancy and might herald the onset of t2dm . diabetes in malta : in 2010 , a pilot European health examination survey ( ehes ) was conducted in which blood glucose measurements were taken to estimate the prevalence of diabetes . 9.8 % of the study population ( aged 18 years and over ) were found to have diabetes . the prevalence of elevated blood glucose increased sharply after the age of 40. between the ages of 41 and 60 , 12.2 % of the study sample had elevated blood glucose , while this rose to 21.6 % of the population older than 60 ( directorate for health information and research , 2010 ) . according to the international diabetes federation , 10.1 % of all 20-79 year olds in malta suffer from diabetes . this places malta in the first quartile within the European region . the last population-based prevalence study on diabetes was the Monica study conducted under the auspices of who in 1984. this study had estimated prevalence of diabetes in persons aged 15+ in malta at 7.7 % . the above data , whilst having certain limitations , clearly shows diabetes to be a relatively large and still growing health problem in malta . mortality due to diabetes : in 2013 , the standardized mortality rate due to diabetes was 13 per 100,000 for females , and 19 per 100,000 for males . the average age of death due to diabetes mellitus was 72.2 years in males and 77.9 years in females , compared to the general population 's average age at death of 73.5 years and 79.3 years , respectively ( directorate for health information and research , 2013 ) . diabetes in pregnancy : in 2014 , there were 18 mothers who were reported as being insulin-dependent before their pregnancy , while there were 6 mothers reported with non-insulin-dependent diabetes prior to pregnancy . there was a total of 135 mothers registered with impaired glucose tolerance or gestational diabetes ( directorate of health information and research , 2014 ) . hospital stay : the average length of stay in hospital for diabetes mellitus is the highest in the eu since 2011. in 2014 , it was 14.6 days while the eu average was 8.4 days 2014 ( eurostat , 2015 ) . risk factors for diabetes age since t2dm is commonly diagnosed in middle age and is most prevalent in older people , the changing demographics will have an impact on the prevalence of diabetes . socio-economic factors such as obesity , physical inactivity , unhealthy diet , smoking and poor blood pressure control are all associated with increased risk of developing diabetes . these are more prevalent in individuals suffering from social deprivation and are hence linked ( wilkinson & marmot , 2003 ) . modifiable risk factors : obesity : when compared to eu member states , malta has the highest rate of obesity amongst males and the third highest rate amongst females . 69 % of males and 49.1 % of females were overweight and obese ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . unhealthy diet : the health promotion & disease prevention directorate is in the process of conducting a national food consumption survey which will give a good indication of maltese eating habits . based on previous surveys , the national obesity strategy has six targets for nutrition which include : reducing the frequency of intake of processed meats , sweets , pastries and sugared soft drinks , increasing the intake of fish and vegetables , and reducing the mean daily intake of animal fat ( superintendence of public health , 2012 ) . physical inactivity : the 2002 and 2005 eurobarometer studies on physical activity and health and food respectively report malta as scoring the lowest in a comparison undertaken with the eu-15 ( 2002 ) and eu-25 ( 2005 ) member states for the number of days of moderate and vigorous physical activity , lowest duration of physical activity during the day and lowest average walking time during the week ( eurostat , 2015 ) . smoking : 19.2 % of the maltese population aged 15 or older smoke daily ( euaverage 23.9 % ) . ( department of health information and research , 2008 ; eurostat , 2015 ) in the 2007 european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs study , conducted among form 5 students , 26 % of children reported smoking cigarettes in the previous 30 days . 3.4 % of children have their first cigarette when less than 9 years old and the age at which the highest number of children smoked their first cigarette is 14 years ( european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs , 2007 ) . according to the latest health behaviour in school children study , malta scored third from the top in terms of 13-year-olds who smoke at least once ( 11 % of girls and 9 % of boys ) ( who europe , 2006 ) . Health impact of diabetes general effects on health and well-being diabetes is associated with a variety of other conditions affecting health . in fact , local data from the health interview survey reveals that the age-adjusted means of both the mean health index and the mean vitality index score are significantly lower in people with diabetes when compared to those without ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . another measure of morbidity caused by diabetes is the self -reported need for prescribed medications in diabetics versus non-diabetics , after the diabetic medication itself is excluded . while 55 % of male diabetics are on some prescribed medication , only 35 % of non-diabetics are . this difference is slightly smaller in females but still significant ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . cardiovascular disease : damage to arteries occurs in the presence of prolonged high glucose concentrations . this leads to a variety of cardiovascular diseases such as heart disease , stroke and peripheral vascular disease . people with diabetes have about twice the risk of developing a range of cardiovascular diseases , compared with those without diabetes , and are likely to die due to them . cardiovascular disease is a major cause of death and disability in people with diabetes , accounting for 44 percent of fatalities in people with type 1 diabetes and 52 percent in people with tdm . local data also shows that persons with diabetes have a higher all-cause mortality rate after a myocardial infarction , than persons without diabetes . in addition , people with t2dm have a two-fold increased risk of stroke within the first five years of diagnosis compared with the general population . kidney disease : the damage caused by high blood sugar concentrations also affects small vessels in the kidneys . they start working less efficiently which may eventually result in kidney failure . keeping blood glucose levels as near normal as possible and blood pressure well controlled can greatly reduce the risk of kidney disease developing as well as other diabetes complications . despite this , diabetes is the single most common mellitus is the highest in the eu since 2011. in 2014 , it was 14.6 days while the eu average was 8.4 days 2014. risk factors for diabetes age since t2dm is commonly diagnosed in middle age and is most prevalent in older people , the changing demographics will have an impact on the prevalence of diabetes . socio-economic factors such as obesity , physical inactivity , unhealthy diet , smoking and poor blood pressure control are all associated with increased risk of developing diabetes . these are more prevalent in individuals suffering from social deprivation and are hence linked . modifiable risk factors : obesity : when compared to eu member states , malta has the highest rate of obesity amongst males and the third highest rate amongst females . 69 % of males and 49.1 % of females were overweight and obese . unhealthy diet : the health promotion & disease prevention directorate is in the process of conducting a national food consumption survey which will give a good indication of maltese eating habits . based on previous surveys , the national obesity strategy has six targets for nutrition which include : reducing the frequency of intake of processed meats , sweets , pastries and sugared soft drinks , increasing the intake of fish and vegetables , and reducing the mean daily intake of animal fat ( superintendence of public health , 2012 ) . physical inactivity : the 2002 and 2005 eurobarometer studies on physical activity and health and food respectively report malta as scoring the lowest in a comparison undertaken with the eu-15 ( 2002 ) and eu-25 ( 2005 ) member states for the number of days of moderate and vigorous physical activity , lowest duration of physical activity during the day and lowest average walking time during the week ( eurostat , 2015 ) . smoking : 19.2 % of the maltese population aged 15 or older smoke daily ( euaverage 23.9 % ) . ( department of health information and research , 2008 ; eurostat , 2015 ) in the 2007 european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs study , conducted among form 5 students , 26 % of children reported smoking cigarettes in the previous 30 days . 3.4 % of children have their first cigarette when less than 9 years old and the age at which the highest number of children smoked their first cigarette is 14 years ( european school survey project on alcohol and other drugs , 2007 ) . according to the latest health behaviour in school children study , malta scored third from the top in terms of 13-year-olds who smoke at least once ( 11 % of girls and 9 % of boys ) ( who europe , 2006 ) . health impact of diabetes general effects on health and well-being diabetes is associated with a variety of other conditions affecting health . in fact , local data from the health interview survey reveals that the age-adjusted means of both the mean health index and the mean vitality index score are significantly lower in people with diabetes when compared to those without ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . another measure of morbidity caused by diabetes is the self -reported need for prescribed medications in diabetics versus non-diabetics , after the diabetic medication itself is excluded . while 55 % of male diabetics are on some prescribed medication , only 35 % of non-diabetics are . this difference is slightly smaller in females but still significant ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . cardiovascular disease : damage to arteries occurs in the presence of prolonged high glucose concentrations . this leads to a variety of cardiovascular diseases such as heart disease , stroke and peripheral vascular disease . people with diabetes have about twice the risk of developing a range of cardiovascular diseases , compared with those without diabetes , and are likely to die due to them . cardiovascular disease is a major cause of death and disability in people with diabetes , accounting for 44 percent of fatalities in people with type 1 diabetes and 52 percent in people with tdm . local data also shows that persons with diabetes have a higher all-cause mortality rate after a myocardial infarction , than persons without diabetes . in addition , people with t2dm have a two-fold increased risk of stroke within the first five years of diagnosis compared with the general population . kidney disease : the damage caused by high blood sugar concentrations also affects small vessels in the kidneys . they start working less efficiently which may eventually result in kidney failure . keeping blood glucose levels as near normal as possible and blood pressure well controlled can greatly reduce the risk of kidney disease developing as well as other diabetes complications . despite this , diabetes is the single most common cause of end-stage renal disease , and around one in three people with t2dm eventually develops overt kidney disease . kidney disease is the second most common cause of death in diabetics , accounting for 21 percent of deaths in t1dm and 11 percent of deaths in t2dm . eye disease : blood vessels in the retina of the eye can also be damaged . this leads to compromised vision and may even lead to blindness if untreated ( retinopathy ) . within 20 years of diagnosis , nearly all people with t1dm and almost two-thirds of people with t2dm ( 60 percent ) have some degree of retinopathy , and people with diabetes are 10 to 20 times more likely to go blind than people without diabetes . people with diabetes are also twice as likely to suffer from cataracts or glaucoma as the general population . the health interview survey in 2008 asked respondents to state whether they could recognize a face 4 meters away or read a newspaper as a measure of short/long-sightedness respectively . diabetic subjects were found to be more likely to report having a lot of difficulty or even being completely unable to do so than non-diabetics ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) ( p= < 0.05 ) . amputation : the biggest cause of amputations in persons with diabetes is due to peripheral artery disease . worldwide , the rate of leg amputations in people with diabetes is over 15 times higher than in people without diabetes . it is a cause of great morbidity and also a risk factor for premature death since up to 70 percent of people die within five years of having an amputation as a result of diabetes . in malta , 74 % of persons who suffer a major amputation have diabetes ( amputee database 2015 ) . mental health : emotional health and wellbeing can be affected by coping with diabetes and as a side effect of some medication . the prevalence of depression is approximately twice as high in people with diabetes as it is in the general population . locally , people with diabetes are more likely to report symptoms of chronic anxiety or depression when compared to non-diabetics ( self-reported ) ( department of health information and research , 2008 ) . neuropathy : due to the damage to nerves that diabetes causes , some patients suffer from chronic nerve pain . neuropathies ( or nerve damage ) may affect up to 50 per cent of patients with diabetes , which may lead to charcot deformities that impact greatly on the quality of life . the same neuropathy can result in erectile dysfunction . the reported prevalence of erectile dysfunction is between 35 percent and 90 percent among men with diabetes . oral health : current evidence shows that there is a bi-directional relationship between diabetes and periodontal disease and that periodontitis may be associated with increasing glycaemia in people who do not have diabetes . type 2 diabetes is itself a risk factor for periodontitis . complications in pregnancy : a fetus of a pregnant mother who is also a diabetic or develops diabetes during pregnancy is at greater risk for complications such as macrosomia ( excessive birth-weight ) which may lead to complications during labor , neonatal hypoglycemia , and stillbirth . uncontrolled or unrecognized diabetes in early pregnancy can also lead to congenital malformations and miscarriages . projections ( future health profile ) : according to the latest projections by the international diabetes federation , the local prevalence of diabetes is expected to rise unless drastic action is undertaken to address this . the rise in prevalence together with maltas changing demographics also means that maltese diabetics will get older and hence more prone to morbidity ( international diabetes federation , 2013 ) . there are three categories of costs associated with diabetes : direct costs : diabetes is costly for the healthcare systems because of its chronic nature and particularly because of the gravity of its complications . indirect costs : diabetes causes a loss of productivity because of disability . sick leave , early retirement and premature death . These costs are borne both by firms and by insurance companies . indirect costs are often higher than direct costs . intangible costs : diabetes influences the quality of life of patients ( suffering , anxiety , and discrimination sometimes ) . it can also affect their social life and their leisure time . Their mobility can also be reduced because of the disease . diabetes complications require hospitalization most of the time . 50 % of people with diabetes suffer from at least one complication . hospitalization represents the biggest proportion of the direct costs . It implies admission to hospital , laboratory analysis , the work of medical staff , specific therapies , and investments to assure the best quality of care for affected people . the length and the frequency of this hospitalization also increase the costs on health systems . by contrast , drug costs ( insulin , anti-diabetic drugs ) to treat t2dm are relatively low . in conclusion , diabetes complications represent a huge cost for healthcare systems . local costs : in malta , the annual excess cost for hospital , primary care and specialist visits for persons with diabetes versus those without diabetes has been calculated using ehis 2008 data . it is estimated to be at least 9 million , the bulk of which is due to more frequent and longer inpatient stays . the rationale for a national diabetes strategy for malta : diabetes is an important cause of morbidity in the maltese population . its incidence is rising in all age groups . diabetes has a significant impact on the quality of life of the individuals affected as well as their families . furthermore , diabetes is an economic burden to society . some types of diabetes are preventable . prevention strategies require a whole of society approach as is proposed in the who health policy health 2020. persons with diabetes have the potential to lead an active and fulfilled life . the support from society in terms of provision of high-quality health care that is free at the point of use as well as removal of barriers for engagement in work and leisure activities are important aspects of any diabetes strategy . the high prevalence of diabetes in malta warrants a national strategy . whilst acknowledging and building upon the existing strengths , a national strategy allows us to focus on the gaps and propose measures to address them . this will ensure coordinated action from health authorities , health care providers , health care professionals , patients and civil society in order to bring about a coordinated and consistent approach to diabetes prevention and care in malta . in november 2014 , government published a draft strategy as a proposal for consultation . following the feedback obtained during the public consultation process as well as the consultation that took place through the parliamentary working group on diabetes , government has selected the priority initiatives for implementation over the next five years . these measures need to be implemented in partnership with all of society . this document largely builds upon the proposal issued in november 2014 since the feedback received during the consultation process indicated that there is a broad consensus on the proposed areas for action . this first-ever national diabetes strategy for malta forms part of a series of health policies geared towards reduction of the burden of chronic non-communicable disease in society within the overarching framework of the national health systems strategy . Provision of clinical services for diabetes : all adult persons with diabetes irrespective of the aetiology and classification of their diabetes have access to specialist care provided within the diabetes clinic at mater dei hospital . this clinic has been established for several decades previously at st. lukes hospital and has been the reference point for all health care professionals and patients with regards to diabetes care offering services in line with international recommendations and standards for the management of patients with diabetes . services are provided by specialized doctors , nurses , and allied health professionals both on an outpatient and inpatient basis . adults with t1dm , gestational diabetes , maturity onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) and other rare types of diabetes as well as persons with complications from t2dm are all seen within the specialist clinics at mater dei hospital since this is the appropriate clinical setting to care for these conditions . children with diabetes are seen by a consultant pediatrician and endocrinologist at the children 's outpatients . when complications develop , other professionals are involved in the care of the person with diabetes depending on the nature of the complication . ophthalmologists , renal physicians , vascular surgeons , cardiologists , physiotherapists , occupational therapists , podiatrists , and tissue viability nurses are key in the care of persons with diabetes who develop complications . over the past few years in order to meet the increasing demand as the prevalence of diabetes increases as a result of the demographic transition and other factors , as well as to devolve management as much as possible towards a primary care setting , a shared care diabetes program has been developed between mater dei hospital as the specialist referral centre for all adult persons with diabetes and the health centres in primary care . in this shared care programme , primarily patients with uncomplicated t2dm are seen by a general practitioner ( gp ) with a special clinical interest in primary care . patients are also seen at prescribed time intervals by the specialist in diabetes and fast-track referral scheme are in place to allow patients to be seen in between scheduled specialist appointments should the necessity arise . services to prevent eye complications through preventive retinal photography have been in place in a hospital setting for several years . more recently fundoscopy cameras have also been installed in the community . likewise , podiatrists offer foot screening , examination and management in both the hospital and community settings . currently , persons with diabetes in malta can choose to be managed either through the public health sector or through the private sector . in the private sector patients are managed by their private gp or by their private diabetes specialist through a system of professional referral as the need arises . the significant contribution of private primary care in the maltese health care system means that for a number of patients private primary care providers play a key role in the care of persons with diabetes . in many cases , a combination of service providers may be responsible for care of persons with diabetes across hospital and primary care and across public and private settings . all persons with diabetes are also encouraged to attend structured diabetes education sessions carried out by diabetes nurses , doctors , dietitian s and podiatrists . sometimes referral for psychological review is also required . seamless communication and coordination of all aspects of patient care therefore represent a particular challenge in the management of diabetes which requires the specialized input of several health care professionals . the diabetes clinics in health centres are mostly run by family doctors with a special interest and training in diabetes . the number of attendances has been steadily increasing over the years . persons with diabetes are seen in a holistic manner , and a number of routine investigations and examinations are performed at least every 6 months . persons with diabetes are referred to the clinics by referral from family doctors in the community ( both public and private ) , and also from mater dei hospital . chapter3 : prevention and early diagnosis of type2 diabetes . epidemiological studies have shown that the maltese population has a relatively high prevalence of carbohydrate metabolism disorders in persons over 15 years . this higher prevalence is corroborated by increased rates of maltese pregnant women with an impaired glucose metabolism . it is well established that these women are at an increased risk of development of t2dm or impaired glucose tolerance later on in life . persons are diagnosed as having diabetes according to blood glucose levels set at the threshold at which they are at an increased risk of developing microvascular , cardiovascular complications and premature mortality 2. the situation is unfortunately not as simple as this , there is a grey area where they may be hyperglycaemic above the normal ranges but below the threshold classifying diabetes . this category of people are often termed pre-diabetics and are at increased risk of developing diabetes and its complications . the major drivers for t2dm are modifiable risk factors such as high rates of overweight and obesity in adults and children . an integrated approach to tackling chronic diseases is the way forward . this is based on the fact that there are common risk factors and co-existence of a number of chronic diseases in a person . in europe it was estimated that 35 % of men over the age of 60 years will have two or more chronic diseases contemporaneously . an integrated , patient-centred approach to prevention will cut costs over managing the patient for each condition separately capitalizing on scarce resources and having a greater impact on the individuals health . at the same time care needs to be taken to focus on diabetes prevention on those persons deemed to be at high risk of developing this disease . modifiable risk factors for developing diabetes . overweight or obesity : excess weight is widely acknowledged to independently increase the risk of developing diabetes . the magnitude of this association has been widely investigated and various strengths of association have been quoted . there is general consensus that at a body mass index ( bmi ) of 23kg/m2 there is no additional risk of developing diabetes attributable to weight . particularly above a bmi of 29kg/m2 the risks are markedly increased whilst with a bmi of 25-29kg/m2 persons were found to have twice the risk of those with a bmi of 23kg/m2 . excess weight earlier on in life was also found to be associated with an increased diabetic risk . a meta-analysis of well-powered studies of this association have found that when adjusting for the three main confounding variables ( age , family history of t2dm and physical activity ) , the relative risk of developing diabetes was 7.28 for obese persons and 2.92 for overweight persons . furthermore , wald et al . designed an algorithm to determine the percentage body weight loss that was found to neutralize ones excess diabetic risk related to weight . A 10 % reduction in weight would approximately half the risk of developing diabetes whereas a 20 % reduction in body weight would decrease this risk by approximately three quarters . the bmi level at which the risk for diabetes is least is 22kg/m2 . there is thus significant public health impact of adequate weight control at a population level as regards the diabetic risk . physical inactivity a number of large cohort studies provide strong evidence for the value of physical activity in reducing the incidence of t2dm . although we know that physical inactivity is an independent risk factor for diabetes , the exact values are specific to the study population . in the usa it was estimated that 13 % of t2dm in men and 29 % of t2dm in women was attributable to lack of physical activity whilst in finland this ranges from 3 % to 7 % . although both obesity and the lack of physical activity were found to be independent risk factors for diabetes , the former was found to confer the larger risk . physical activity in itself results in lower rates of obesity and therefore the role of physical activity in preventing diabetes should not be underestimated . gestational diabetes it is well established that women who have experienced gestational impaired carbohydrate metabolism disorders such as gestational impaired glucose tolerance and gestational diabetes ( gdm ) are at an increased risk of developing t2dm later on in life . a local eight year follow up cross sectional study has shown the risk for women with gigt/gdm was 3.6-6.7 times higher than for the general population . factors that were shown to increase the risk of progression to prediabetes and also to t2dm included weight gain and increased waist circumference post-partum . targeting women with elevated fasting glucose levels during pregnancy may prove to have the greatest effect for the effort required . this is a golden opportunity to target effective lifestyle interventions amongst this high-risk group . one must not forget that the offspring of these women are also considered to be at an increased diabetic risk due to the altered milieu interieur to which they were exposed . therefore , establishing healthy attitudes will benefit both the mother and the child . tobacco three large prospective studies suggest that smoking is associated with the development of t2dm in men and women consistent with evidence linking smoking and insulin resistance . in a study on middle-aged british men , the risk of t2dm was significantly increased in cigarette smokers compared with never-smokers , despite their lower body weight . the relationship was stronger after adjustment for bmi and persisted after additional adjustment for other potential confounders . sufficient evidence exists to indicate that cigarette smoking is an independent and modifiable risk factor for t2dm . high blood glucose ( prediabetes ) high blood glucose is a substantial risk factor for diabetes and in the long run , heart disease and stroke . impaired fasting glucose ( ifg ) and impaired glucose tolerance ( igt ) are two states of abnormal glucose metabolism that are collectively known as prediabetes . current estimates are that up to 70 % of persons with ifg/igtmay progress to diabetes . in persons with diabetes , cardiovascular risk increases in a linear fashion with hyperglycaemia . the whitehall study showed a definite graded relationship between increasing levels of hyperglycaemia above a threshold level and coronary mortality . metabolic syndrome abdominal obesity may be associated with clustering of cardiovascular and metabolic risk factors which constitute the metabolic syndrome . this includes hypertriglyceridemia , low high-density lipoprotein and cholesterol levels , high blood pressure , and elevated levels of fasting glucose . patients with even minimal abnormalities in any 3 of the 5 risk factors for the metabolic syndrome are at heightened risk for developing cvd or diabetes . the risk for disease increases over time as the number of metabolic syndrome characteristics accumulates and hence early management is warranted . evidence for preventing the onset of diabetes as outlined below , there is robust evidence that in the case of diabetes , prevention does work . evidence exists for the effectiveness and benefits of diabetes prevention , earlier diagnosis and better care of the diagnosed patient . numerous studies have shown how lifestyle intervention when applied consistently in the form of dietary advice and or the introduction of sustained physical activity to a population of high-risk individuals , results in the delay or actual prevention of t2 dm . one of the earliest studies in this regard is known as the malmo study . middle aged men with normal glucose tolerance and others who were known to have impaired glucose tolerance at baseline were assigned to continue as usual whilst others were prescribed a lifestyle intervention composed of six months of supervised physical training and dietary treatment . this study showed a lower incidence of t2dm amongst the group who had undergone the lifestyle intervention with an increased reversal of impaired glucose tolerance to normal levels . mortality at 12 years follow up was also found to be better for this latter group . the da qing study period , in contrast , lasted for 6 years and this attempted to determine the relative effect of either a dietary intervention or an intervention involving increased physical activity on the development of diabetes . they found that diet reduced the incidence by 31 % , exercise by 46 % and a combination of both resulted in a reduction of 42 % . the finnish diabetes prevention study ( dps ) was the first randomized control trial that studied the effect of lifestyle intervention of a group of obese or overweight participants with impaired glucose tolerance at baseline . after two years of this trial , it was concluded that the intervention group had less than half the risk of developing diabetes as compared to the non-intervention group . this impact of the lifestyle change was found to persist for at least four years after the intervention was terminated . this cumulative attenuation of the individual ’ s risk was seen with the achievement of each health promoting goal including weight loss , increased physical activity , increased dietary fiber and decreased intake of total and saturated fats . the diabetes prevention program ( dpp ) is another larger randomized clinical trial in which individuals of various ethnicities and of diverse cohorts were randomized to one of three intervention groups . one included placebo treatment , one included treatment with metformin whilst the latter was a lifestyle intervention group . the participants of the intensive lifestyle intervention group were required to lose at least 7 % of their initial body weight through a healthy diet and 150 minutes of moderate in tensity physical activity per week . individualized , targeted sessions were delivered through a carefully organized , standard curriculum . the results were clear - the group that was assigned the intensive lifestyle modification program had a 58 % less risk of developing diabetes as compared to the placebo group . it is important that lifestyle interventions are patient centered rather than the one -size-fits-all approach and they must also be culturally adapted to the context within which they are to be used . studies have shown that interventions advocating an improvement in diet alone or an increase physical activity alone or a combination of the two have been found to be equally effective . objectives increase awareness and literacy about diabetes decrease the risk of t2dm by targeting the modifiable risk factors including : overweight and obesity , physical inactivity , smoking , dyslipidaemia and hypertension , particularly in high -risk groups improve the health outcomes of people with diabetes through early diagnosis , improved self-management and lifestyle modification guiding principles adopt a whole of society and whole of government approach diabetes is largely caused by the way we live and work . it is not caused by the health system and can not be solved by the health system alone . lifestyle choices are strongly influenced by trade , marketing , fiscal policies , education , transport and urban environment , media and agricultural practices . the whole of society and whole of government approach should underpin effective strategies to prevent the onset of risk factors related to diabetes and to improve the health outcomes of diabetes . this approach underpins both the noncommunicable disease strategy and the healthy weight for life strategy . in order to be effective , actions resulting from the diabetes plan must include intersectoral action and be congruent with actions resulting from the ncd and hwl strategies . life course approach the risk causes of noncommunicable diseases including diabetes accumulate throughout life , starting from in utero through childhood and adolescence , adulthood into old age . the main factors at different stages of life include : foetal life foetal growth , maternal nutritional status and socio-economic position at birth infancy and childhood breastfeeding , unhealthy diet , lack of physical activity , obesity , socio-economic position adolescence unhealthy diet , lack of physical activity , obesity , alcohol and tobacco use adult known behavioural and biological risk factors evidence is accumulating that effective policies addressing these risks can prevent ncds . the risk of developing diabetes is influenced by biological or social factors acting at all stages of the life course , including the exposure to gestational maternal diabetes and high birth weight . obesity , high blood pressure and dyslipidaemia track from childhood through adolescence and young adulthood , leading to atherosclerosis and in many cases diabetes . focus on equity equity is the absence of avoidable or remediable differences among groups of people , whether those groups are defined socially , economically , demographically , or geographically . health inequity encompasses both health determinants and access to resources to maintain or improve health outcomes . the determinants of health affect people ’ s opportunities to make and sustain healthy choices , including their ability to choose healthier diets and undertake regular physical activity , and their capability of maximizing health outcomes while living with diabetes . strategies for diabetes prevention will aim to contribute towards the reduction of health inequalities by reaching out to vulnerable and hard to reach groups . National strategies working in synergy to prevent diabetes several public health strategies published over the past years focus on reducing the prevalence of risk factors relating to diabetes . some of the actions aimed at reducing the prevalence of t2dm and its complications in the general population include the provision of education on healthier lifestyles , the promotion of healthy diets in schools and the lowering of the prevalence of excess weight especially in those with a history of first degree relatives with t2 dm . the strategy for the prevention and control of non -communicable diseases ( ncd ) also focuses on secondary prevention to ensure the reduction of excessive weight in persons with diabetes and lifestyle modification , to improve the level of education and self-management in persons with diabetes and to encourage exercise among these persons . it promotes the role of primary care teams in providing primary and secondary prevention ( health promotion and disease prevention directorate , 2010 ) . the food and nutrition policy and action plan ( 2014 ) identifies nutrition as a major modifiable determinant of chronic disease . this action plan takes population based approaches and individual targeted interventions through collaborative health-in-all policies and whole-of-government approach involving all levels of government and relevant stakeholders ( health promotion and disease prevention directorate , 2014 ) . the healthy weight for life ( hwl ) strategy points out that overweight and obesity are responsible for about 80 % of cases of t2dm . this strategy focuses on action related to nutrition and physical activity across the life course and within different settings . it requires a whole of government and whole of society approach in order to achieve effective actions and to reach its targets by 2020 ( superintendence of public health , 2012 ) . in additional other strategies focusing on policy strengthening the sports culture within the population , including increasing access to high quality sports facilities have also resulted in new opportunities for physical activity for different age groups in localities all over both islands ( malta sports council , 2006 ) . the healthy eating lifestyle plan regulates food and drink consumed on school premises including during special activities and those provided from school tuck shops . it promotes the concept of the health promoting school by giving guidelines on both nutrition and physical activity and encouraging the integration of the school as a health resource within the wider community ( ministry for education and employment , 2014 ) . the breastfeeding policy builds on previous work done to make breastfeeding the cultural norm , by involving the whole family , health professionals , employers , educators and retailers to encourage exclusive breastfeeding till six months and as long as both mother and child wish to continue thereafter . actions increase awareness and literacy a bout diabetes this objective needs to be tackled at various levels . results from a recent survey on health literacy in the general population indicate that there is a need to implement a programme to improve health literacy particularly amongst certain population groups . awareness and health literacy about diabetes should be implemented at population level , amongst individuals who are known to be at higher risk of developing t2dm , amongst individual who are newly diagnosed with diabetes and amongst health care professionals . these programmes will be undertaken in partnership with professional associations and with ngos through the following actions . implementation of an integrated social marketing programme which provides strong messages about the risks , seriousness and impact of t2dm and focuses on the preventability of the condition . development and implementation of a specific health literacy programme for persons with diabetes provision or education and support for staff in schools in identifying and dealing with diabetes emergencies design and delivery of an interactive it based continuing professional development programme on prevention and management of diabetes for all health care workers tailored to their specific needs and levels of education interventions for individuals at high risk of type 2 diabetes by targeting modifiable risk factors besides the work carried out at population level , certain groups are known to have an increased risk of developing t2dm . one easily identifiable group deserving close monitoring and support is women who develop gestational diabetes . therefore , it is foreseen that specific outreach support programmes will be developed for these women at higher risk . other persons deemed at risk will be referred for lifestyle modification support programmes offered through the directorate for health promotion . the following actions will be implemented . development of formalized post-partum follow-up and prevention programmes for women with gestational diabetes referral of persons deemed at high-risk of developing t2dm for smoking cessation or weight management programmes as appropriate improve the health outcomes of persons with type 2 diabetes through early diagnosis , improved self-management and lifestyle modification diabetes is often asymptomatic in its early stages . yet appropriate management and glycaemic control at the outset serve to postpone complications and improve quality of life . besides the obvious benefits of avoiding or postponing complications for the affected individuals and their families , several studies have shown economic and societal benefit through the implementation of programmes which promote early diagnosis . earlier diagnosis consists of identifying high risk individuals and offering them appropriate diagnostic tests . the best consensus appears to indicate that whilst population-based screening is not justified in terms of numbers needed to screen , there is value in implementing clinical opportunistic screening for the condition . studies tend to agree that screening should be targeted towards high-risk individuals . the most consistent factors that predict the likelihood of diabetes are the following and persons with any of the following characteristics should be screened using fasting venous blood glucose as the screening test for igr and t2dm . obesity ( bmi > 30 kg/m2 ) family history ( first degree relative ) raised blood pressure ( systolic > 130 mm hg ) and /or heart disease previous occurrence of diabetes in pregnancy use of drugs that predispose a patient to t2dm , including : nicotinic acid ; glucocorticoids ; thyroid hormone ; beta-adrenergic antagonists ; thiazides ; phenytoin ; pentamidine ; anti-psychotic a gents ; interferon-alpha therapy . all health care professionals who encounter persons who have at least one of these risk factors are encouraged to ask about screening for diabetes in the past 12 months and to refer persons for opportunistic screening . improving health literacy for people with diabetes will focus on improving their knowledge , skills and confidence , enabling them to take increasing control of their own condition and integrate effective self-management into their daily lives . high-quality structured and sustained educational programmes can have a beneficial effect on health outcomes and can significantly improve quality of life . successful outcomes in diabetes depend to a great extent on the role patients plan in managing their condition on a daily basis . at the initial stages of diagnosis , it is fairly common for patients to pass through the recognized stages of grief for the loss of health . at the same time during this initial stage patients have to learn about their condition , lifestyle changes , medicines , self-monitoring , management and avoidance of complications . it is the duty of every health care professional seeing diabetic patients including doctors , nurses , pharmacists , podiatrists , dietitians to provide patients education and counselling during clinical encounters . furthermore , structured patient education , particularly at the time of diagnosis or treatment transition , is also needed . education needs to be reinforced at regular intervals . the current programme is primarily administered by diabetes specialist nurses . however , it is recognised that further efforts need to be carried out to tailor education on self - management according to the persons level of health literacy . low levels of uptake of the programme have been identified and , therefore , use of modern communications media should be considered as an alternative to ensure the delivery of the key messages as well as specific outreach . the education programme should be delivered by all members of the multidisciplinary team covering different topics . the provision of education should be based on adult learning principles that promote active learning ideally provided within a group format , unless this is considered inappropriate . structured programmes should be provided by appropriately trained multidisciplinary teams including , as a minimum , a dietitian and a diabetes specialist nurse ( or practice nurse experienced in diabetes ) who understand the principles of patient education . this is complementary to one-to-one patient education undertaken by health care professionals attending to patients with diabetes ; doctors are particularly encouraged to ensure that their patients are appropriate literate about their diabetes during clinical encounters . dietary care planning and diabetes nutrition management is fundamental for the prevention of t2dm and the effective management of all types of diabetes . newly diagnosed diabetics should be provided with a tailored and individualized dietary care plan based on the latest evidence of effectiveness . people taking hypoglycaemic drugs and insulin will need further advice on dietary management to balance their food intake and physical activity levels with their medication . dietary changes need to be agreed at a pace suited to the individual regular follow up appointments are recommended in the initial stages after diagnosis or at times of transition , such as when medication is changed . people with diabetes who present with possible eating disorders ( e.g . bingeing etc . ) should be referred to a clinical psychologist and dietitian for a joint programme of care . patients need regular updating , and it has been shown that when patients accept their condition they are more receptive to educational interventions . it is , therefore , important that all patients with t2dm as well as those with t1dm receive regular educational session on diabetes management and control through the course of their disease . such sessions also serve as an opportunity for patients to ask for advice and to identify persons who may require additional support from dietetic or psychological services . educational material will be prepared using different media to reinforce the importance of self-management for persons with diabetes . lifestyle modification should become standard management for all newly diagnosed persons with type 2 diabetes . self-management will focus specifically on smoking cessation , weight management , optimal glycaemic control , control of hypertension , dyslipidaemia and regular screening for heart , eye , kidney and foot complications ( health promotion and disease prevention directorate , 2010 ) . therefore the following actions are foreseen : implementation of a clinical opportunistic screening programme to decrease the rate of undiagnosed diabetes in partnership with gps , outpatient clinics , pharmacies , dental clinics referral of newly diagnosed persons with diabetes to smoking cessation and weight management programmes health literacy sessions for persons with type 2 diabetes specifically focused on self-management chapter4 : improving access to innovative quality treatment introduction defining access to medicines and devices for diabetes the cost of ensuring access to diabetes medicines and devices should be considered as an investment by all of society to alleviate the human and financial burden of poorly controlled diabetes and its complications . the social and indirect costs ( such as the loss of productivity due to illness ) of diabetes -related complications may be even greater than their direct cost to health systems ( international diabetes federation europe , 2011 ) . government through this strategy is determined to make access to diabetes care be seen as an investment to promote a healthier and more productive society and is a contributor to long-term economic growth . however , ensuring access to diabetes treatment is a costly , complex and resource-consuming challenge . it is nonetheless acknowledged that through the needs assessment and consultation process a general consensus emerged that this aspect of diabetes care in malta is an important priority to be urgently addressed even though it must not be forgotten that this is also only one element in high-quality comprehensive diabetes care ( international diabetes federation europe , 2011 ) . in addressing the goal of improving access to innovative quality treatment , the strategy sets out the following objective : to implement a plan of expansion of the government formulary for diabetes in order to provide access to those innovative treatments which have been shown to improve health outcomes and quality of life in persons with diabetes whilst giving due attention to the impact of such expansion on the overall financial sustainability of our health system to improve access to devices that promote self-monitoring and self -management of diabetes in order to encourage patient participation in the management of their condition and foster an outcome oriented and preventive culture guidelines for the treatment of diabetes mellitus type 1dm t1dm is characterized by a complete deficiency of insulin production . without a regular and reliable supply of insulin , people with t1dm will not survive ( international diabetes federation europe , 2011 ) . an intensified insulin regimen is required in these patients consisting of both basal and prandial insulin . insulins may be divided into the following classes : conventional human insulins : intermediate-acting ( basal ) e.g . isophane insulin short-acting ( prandial ) e.g . soluble insulin- insulin analogues : long-acting ( basal ) e.g . degludec , detemir and glargine rapid- acting ( prandial ) e.g . aspart , glulisine and lispro . both conventional human insulins and insulin analogues may be used in patients with t1dm . the long-acting insulin analogues are recommended in patients with severe or nocturnal hypoglycaemia and who are using an intensified insulin regimen . the insulin regimen should be tailored to the individual patient to achieve the best possible glycaemic control without disabling hypoglycaemia . type 2 diabetes t2dm occurs due to reduced secretion of insulin , or peripheral resistance to the action of insulin ( insulin resistance ) , or due to a combination of both . depending on the status of the condition , t2dm can be treated with lifestyle changes and or oral and non-insulin injectable drugs and or insulin therapy . the treatment pathways for patients with t2dm differ amongst different international guidelines . however , the following principles are common amongst these guidelines . lifestyle modification with emphasis on diet , exercise and continued education is a key pillar in the management of t2dm in any of the clinical pathways that may be pursued . t2dm is a chronic progressive disease requirement for multiple medications to achieve targets increases with time due to decreasing beta-cell function in the pancreas . thus , most patients will require combinations of drugs in order to lower blood glucose levels . the hb a1c target should be individualized according to several patient factors including age , co-morbid conditions , diabetes duration , risk of hypoglycaemia , patient motivation , adherence and life expectancy . the choice of therapy should also be individualized , and a patient-centered approach should be employed . choice is determined on numerous factors including patient characteristics , profiles of the medications themselves and availability/affordability of the different options . patient factors that influence the choice of drugs include other comorbidities e.g . kidney , liver and heart disease , ease of use and patient preference . drug factors that influence the choice of therapy include contraindications and side -effects of the drugs themselves . particular consider action is given to the hypoglycaemia and weight gain potential of these drugs . these two side -effects can adversely affect patient safety , adherence and cost . metformin remains the first-line drug in t2dm if there are no contra indications to it . deployment of metformin at population level is a commonly used indicator of appropriate health system performance in relation to diabetes . available data indicates that we have a fairly good rate of deployment of metformin in malta , yet the place of metformin as the first line drug for t2dm needs to be continually emphasised . the choice of the second-line drug following metformin is not very well backed up by studies and long-term data . thus , various combinations using one or two additional oral or injectable agents are reasonable and recommended interchangeably . the aim is to achieve the patients target level of glycaemic control without significant side -effects . many patients with t2dm may ultimately require insulin therapy ( alone or in combination with other drugs ) as the disease progresses . the management of hyperglycaemia should be put in the context of the overall management of the cardiovascular risk of the patient . management of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia is a key component of successful diabetes care programmes ( and ensuring successful outcomes ) . current local availability of anti-diabetes drugs on the malta government formulary list insulins entitlement to free medication through the public health sector outside a hospital setting is based on the principle of social solidarity and occurs through a system based on criteria linked to disease or means by virtue of the social security act cap 318 article 23 and the amendment of this act-act no . 1 of 2012 and the fifth schedule of the same act . those patients suffering from chronic conditions usually fall under schedule v ( yellow card ) , whilst those with limited means generally pertain to the schedule ii ( pink card ) . human insulins-soluble insulin , isophane insulin and biphasic insulin they are all available in vial form ( for use with an insulin syringe ) and cartridge form ( for use with an insulin pen ) . the human insulins in vial form can be used in all types of diabetes without restriction . however , human insulins in cartridge form are protocol-regulated . they are only available to patients with t1dm or to those who suffer from t2dm and have accompanying visual disturbance . insulin glargine and insulin as part analogues approved for patients with type 1 diabetes only the current entitlement protocol for glargine states that patients should have been for at least six months on a multi dose regimen of conventional insulin ; they should be testing their blood sugar on a four times a day basis for at least three months ; and that their blood glucose monitoring reveals frequent fluctuations in blood sugar with a minimum average of two nocturnal hypoglycaemic episodes per week . the current entitlement protocol for as part states that patients should have been for at least 6 months o n a multi-dose regimen of conventional insulin ; must be testing their blood sugar on a four times a day basis for at least three months ; and that the blood glucose monitoring reveals frequent fluctuations in blood sugar with a minimum average of two postprandial hyperglycaemic episodes per week . oral agents and non-insulin injectables until recently there were only three oral agents on the malta gfl metformin , glibenclamide and gliclazide . these drugs are issued to patients via the schedule v or schedule ii entitlement system . the situation has changed with the adoption of a new pathway for the treatment of diabetes as outlined in the subsequent sections in this chapter . there are currently no non -insulin injectables on the malta gfl . Actions expansion of the government formulary for diabetes following the launch of the consultation document in november 2014 , it was immediately apparent that the lacunae in the government formulary for diabetes had to be addressed with urgency . for a large number of years , the hypoglycaemic drugs available on the government formulary remained unchanged . conscious of the importance of strict glycaemic control , this strategy document recommends that new second line drugs are introduced on the government formulary list ( gfl ) . specifically , repaglinide and gliptins need to be introduced on the gfl at an early stage . it is recommended that insulin analogues at the moment protocol regulated for t1dm-are introduced for all types of diabetes at a later stage . difficulties with access to treatment has been highlighted as an issue which often causes delays in starting treatment . this has been particularly highlighted for example for the use of antibiotics with serious foot infections . steps are being taken to streamline the procedures to obtain antibiotics to treat infections without undue delay . the following actions are therefore being implemented : early provision of gliptins and repaglinide to all those who meet the clinical criteria according to an approved treatment pathway reduction in bureaucracy in the current entitlement protocols for insulin analogues so that they can be given to patients with type 1dm upon diagnosis according to clinical advice . swift access to antibiotics for infections associated with diabetes hypodermic equipment for insulin administration there is currently a quota for the amount of insulin syringes given to patients free of charge . pink card holders get 10 syringes per month whereas patients who have a yellow card for diabetes are entitled to 30 syringes per month . a phased process to increase the monthly quota of syringes in order to support a single use policy will be implemented starting by increasing the monthly quota of syringes for persons with type 1 diabetes monitoring devices for diabetes mellitus persons with type 1 diabetes usually require intensive monitoring of their blood sugar . the current entitlement criteria for the supply of blood glucose monitoring strips for persons with type 1 diabetes are age-dependent . in order to promote self -management of diabetes , it is recommended that four blood glucose strips daily are given to all patients with type 1 diabetes . chapter5 : further developing patient centred services in diabetes care . the management and care of persons with diabetes in malta has developed over the years in line with the st. vincent declaration . the hub for specialist care and management of diabetes and it complications is the diabetes clinic at mater dei hospital . over the past years , efforts have been made to develop a shared care programme with primary care through the health centres . both the care given at mater dei and health centres is supported by nurses and allied health professionals . private general practitioners and specialists in private practice also play an important role in the care and follow up of persons with diabetes . whilst recognizing the efforts made by dedicated health care professionals to provide quality services for persons with diabetes , there always remains more that can be done to ensure that access to high quality services for all patients irrespective of where they obtain their care . the strategy proposes the implementation of a numb er of initiatives to facilitate the implementation of a coordinated , integrated , multidisciplinary service of consistently high quality for all persons with diabetes . the main focus of future service development is to ensure that all persons with diabetes are monitored regularly to ensure risk factor modification and management , including good glycaemic control , to avoid complications . persons with uncomplicated t2dm should be cared for primarily in a community setting through shared care between trained g eneral practitioners and diabetes specialists . this will allow the diabetes clinic based at mater dei hospital to dedicate its resources towards the fulfilment of its mission as a tertiary referral centre for all patients with diabetes identified as requiring regular and intensive specialist care provision whilst remaining the hub for the coordination of all diabetes related services . however , the need to provide high quality services for persons with diabetes in hospitals other than mater dei emerged as an important and urgent priority during the consultation process which needs to be addressed . the development and elaboration of detailed care pathways for patients with different needs has been identified as a key component for the successful implementation of consistently high-quality care across hospital and community and between public and private sectors . care pathways are a means of ensuring consistently high quality of care for all patients as well as educating and empowering patients to engage as partners in their own care . the shared care programme for patients with uncomplicated t2 dmhas been recently updated . one important addition has been the possibility for private sector practitioners to participate in this programme . this is an important component that needs to be fully implemented to ensure that persons seen in the private sector have access to further follow on care without encountering difficulties . the provision of access to key diabetes related services for all doctors participating in the approved shared care program will be implemented in a phased manner . an integrated service of high quality diabetes is known to be associated with increased risk of long -term complications . these include microvascular disease , such as retinopathy , neuropathy and diabetic nephropathy . there is also increased risk of developing macrovascular disease ( coronary heart disease , peripheral vascular disease and cerebrovascular disease ) . health care services for persons with diabetes have the aim of preventing complications as well as ensuring holistic support and well-being . there is a good infrastructure that has been developed over the years particularly the shared care programme between the diabetes clinics in health centres and the specialist referral centre in mater dei hospital which provides a starting point on which to continue to build . the main challenge ahead is to move from a system of passive surveillance to a system where all persons with diabetes are actively invited for monitoring of preventable complications . another important aspect is the strengthening of the human resources complement to ensure that persons deemed to be at greater risk or who are in need of additional support are able to obtain the necessary care and assistance promptly with regular in-depth support . Philosophy of care persons with diabetes need the care and support of a multidisciplinary team of professionals . t2dm is a common chronic condition whose prevalence is set to increase particularly in view of demographic trends . the philosophy of care being recommended is that of management in the community based upon continuity , active follow up , quality documentation and rapid links to specialist advice and care . management of gestational diabetes diabetes in pregnancy can have serious consequences for both mother and baby if undiagnosed and untreated . systematic screening for diabetes in all pregnant mothers will continue to be undertaken . a national standard of care for screening , management of the condition in pregnancy and follow up after pregnancy will be developed to ensure that all pregnant mothers get the best possible care . documentation on the screening tests performed and their outcomes will be maintained by all antenatal care centres . mothers who develop gestational diabetes will be followed up in an active and enhanced manner after delivery since they are known to be at higher risk of developing t2 dm . type2 diabetes-shared care based on consistency , quality and continuity the needs of persons with t2dm will vary depending upon their age , disease progression and existence of other comorbidities . this may require the tailoring of individualised care . however , there are key common principles that apply to all persons with t2dm in our efforts to avoid or delay the emergence of complications . consistency , comprehensiveness and active surveillance shall be the hallmarks of the diabetes care programme . in order to fulfil these objectives , the department of primary care and the diabetes centre at mater dei hospital have updated their shared care programme . although a minimum national standard of care is prescribed , patients are also free to choose where and how they wish to receive care for their diabetes . the aim is to create a system that integrates care provision between hospital and the community and between the public and private sectors . Diagnosis and early stages of type 2 diabetes the diagnosis of t2dm is often a chance finding arising from a routine health check carried out through one ’ s family doctor or health centre . persons diagnosed with t2dm should receive the best support and care possible immediately upon a confirmed diagnosis . all persons with newly diagnosed t2dm will be invited and encouraged to enroll in the national diabetes prevention and management system . this enrolment can be performed through the health centres . in line with this proposal all newly diagnosed patients by public or private general practitioners are to be referred to the health centres where the nurses in charge of managing the diabetes clinics ensure that the patient is enrolled in the national diabetes information system . appointments are made for specialist assessment and review by a diabetologist as well as initial screening for diabetic retinopathy and podiatry review . baseline investigations and measurements are taken and recorded . patients will be referred for health literacy and diabetes education sessions . patients will also be referred for smoking cessation , weight management or exercise assessment and prescription as may be required . both public and private general practitioners shall retain the right to refer patients directly to the mater dei diabetes clinic , if this is clinically indicated to do so . the choice to access treatment in the private sector at all stages remains with the patients who can indicate the name of the private family doctor of their own choice who will continue to provide routine follow up or that of a private diabetologist . all patients irrespective of whether they choose to have their care in a public or private setting will be invited to participate in the national diabetes programme . in the shared care programme all persons with t2dm diabetes are invited to enroll in a national screening programme for prevention of complications . through such enrolment , patients shall be invited at pre-established intervals for preventive screening encounters . this will guarantee that all persons with diabetes have annual blood tests to ensure good glycaemic control , monitor renal function and blood lipids . these results are recorded in the system and provided to the patients general practitioner . this will avoid duplication of tests . the system will ensure that examinations or tests carried out in the private sector are not repeated unnecessarily in the public sector . through this programme patients shall be invited to undergo regular screening through clinical examination , blood investigations , eye screening and foot screening as outlined in the shared care programme . in this manner it is ensured that all persons with diabetes benefit from a national standard of care . the importance of screening for complications will also be addressed in the educational campaigns . active follow up and surveillance will be offered particularly to persons who do not appear to be attending for structured follow up . an enhanced focus on social issues that may deter persons from seeking appropriate care for their diabetes will be made . all patients enrolled in the shared care programme still retain the right to be seen by a specialist for their diabetes care . besides the scheduled routine follow ups at the prescribed time interval appropriate for their clinical condition , urgent fast track referrals from both private and public gps participating in the shared care programme will be facilitated to ensure prompt access for patients who need to be given urgent specialist attention . the pharmacy of your choice scheme will continue to play an important role in the care of persons with diabetes through the provision of advice pertaining to medicines and their side effects , assistance with queries regarding self-management and recognition of non-compliance or need for medication review . the pharmacist is also an integra l part of the multi-disciplinary team and should take the opportunity to reinforce the need for enrolment into the diabetes information system , regular attendance for screening and for updates on matters relating to diabetes self-management . clinical pharmacists are in a position to collaborate with other health-care professionals and can use their expertise to manage and monitor diabetes treatment plans . they have a role in the approach to patient-centred care and can intervene on initiation , dosing , monitoring and discontinuation of drug therapy . in the hospital setting clinical pharmacists can intervene on the wards or during out -patient clinics e.g . diabetes clinic . on the wards they actively participate in medication selection as part of the medical team . they also perform medication reconciliation which is a formal process whereby pharmacists work together with patients , families and care providers to ensure that accurate and comprehensive medication information is communicated consistently across transitions of care in the out-patient clinics clinical pharmacists can offer interim drug therapy visits , patient education , treatment adherence monitoring , health barriers assessment and prevention screening 6. utilization of pharmacists as an essential part of the healthcare team to prevent and manage disease in collaboration with other clinicians can improve quality , contain costs , and increase access to care . recognition of pharmacists as healthcare providers , clinicians and an essential part of the healthcare team is appropriate given the level of care they can provide . ongoing care and support ongoing care and support for persons with t2dm shall primarily take place in the community through the shared care approach with the involvement of both the public and private sector depending upon the patient ’ s choice . in order to achieve best outcomes and to make best use of resources , it is envisaged that patients with uncomplicated t2dm will be cared jointly by general practitioners trained in diabetes care and by a diabetologist . the frequency of these visits will be as clinically required , but all patients should be seen at least once annually . patients with brittle diabetes , diabetes during pregnancy or complications shall be cared for primarily by diabetologists . at annual follow up , patients will have routine clinical review and investigations in line with the national standard for diabetes care . all results are to be captured in the diabetes information system . appointment s for eye and foot screening are organized and appointments for specialist review are made on a routine or urgent basis depending upon clinical findings . during follow up visits , patients are also specifically encouraged to attend follow up educational sessions and maybe referred for dietetic or psychological advice as required . specialist intensive care through an mdt approach the shared care programme based primarily in a primary care or community setting is intended for persons with uncomplicated t2dm . persons with t1dm , gestational diabetes , maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) , other rare forms of diabetes , early onset t2dm and t2dm with complications or which is difficult to control require management of their diabetes given within a specialist setting with regular follow up from all members of the multidisciplinary team . dietary and psychological consultations should be considered as part of the routine follow up for persons requiring close monitoring and support . documentation of all care episodes will be maintained through the diabetes information system . tailored educational sessions in small groups or one to one will be organized as required particularly for persons going through life transitions and for young women in relation to planning pregnancy . prevention and management of eye complications diabetes increases the risk of cataracts and of damage to the retina of the eyes ( diabetic retinopathy ) . in europe , cataracts accounted for of 13.8 -21.6 % blindness in 2010 , whilst diabetic retinopathy accounted for 3.7 -4.2 % . the prevalence of blindness secondary to retinopathy has decreased in many parts of the world because of regular eye screening . in the uk , where a national diabetic retinopathy screening is in place , 56.0 % of t1dm subjects have retinopathy and 11.2 % have sight-threatening retinopathy ; the corresponding figures for t2dm are 30.3 % and 2.9 % respectively . the importance of such regular screening lies in the fact that diabetic retinopathy is often asymptomatic until it has caused irreversible damage and visual loss . A number of persons with undiagnosed diabetes , unfortunately present de novo with vascular eye complications . this should be addressed through the setting up of the diabetes screening programme . furthermore , eye complications can be treated more easily if diagnosed when the patients are still asymptomatic . the establishment of an organized eye screening programme for all persons with diabetes and prompt referral in cases where suspicious pathology is found will enable eye complications to be tacked earlier and more aggressively . there is a need to educate persons with diabetes about the benefits of early laser therapy . the overall goal is to continue to reduce the incidence of blindness associated with diabetes . all persons enrolled in the national diabetes information system will be assessed and monitored regularly to ensure good glycaemic control . this will already assist in the preventing microvascular disease but alone it is not enough . the situation today is such that not all persons with diabetes are carrying out appropriate and regular screening for eye complications . as part of the educational sessions and campaigns , persons with an initial diagnosis of diabetes are made aware of the important of attending screening since argon laser treatment works best when patients are still symptomatic . screening will be performed through an annual assessment using the retinopathy screening fundus cameras that have recently been installed in health centres as well as the fundus cameras available at mater dei hospital . persons enrolled in the national diabetes information system will receive an annual invitation for screening and assessment . fund us images taken by trained ophthalmology nurses or other trained health care professionals and reviewed by ophthalmologists or optometrists shall be assessed using standard criteria . persons with suspicious or definitive pathology will be referred to the ophthalmic department at mater dei hospital through an agreed fast track system . Prevention and management of kidney complications diabetes is the leading cause of kidney disease . diabetic kidney disease is the medical term for kidney disease caused by diabetes . diabetic kidney disease affects both kidneys at the same time . diabetic kidney disease increases mortality even at its early stages . it is now the major cause for the need of dialysis in many countries and the proportion of dialysis patients who are diabetic continues to rise . although outcomes of dialysis in diabetic subjects have improved , mortality is still quite high with a median survival of 3.84 years in t1dm and 2.16 years in t2dm . dialysis is associated with significant health care costs in all patients , but costs are even higher in diabetic subjects by about 27 % . intensive management of blood glucose or glycaemic control has shown great promise for people with diabetes , not only to prevent kidney disease but also in those in the early stages of chronic kidney disease . regular monitoring , lifestyle changes and medication are all important to help persons with diabetes achieve good control . screening for diabetic kidney disease is carried out using three simple tests : blood pressure test . this test must be done at every health care visit . albumin and creatinine measurement . a sample of urine for a urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio test should be done at least once a year . an elevated result is a warning sign of kidney disease . estimated glomerular filtration rate ( egfr ) test . this blood test measures how much blood the kidneys filter each minute . a reduction in the egfr may indicate kidney damage or kidney failure . this test is performed at least once a year . high blood pressure is the other leading cause of kidney disease in people with diabetes . high blood pressure can also be a result of damage from kidney disease . in persons with diabetes , the presence of hypertension may mean that the kidneys are already damaged . even a small rise in blood pressure can quickly make kidney disease worse . some persons will eventually require support through dialysis . specialized care and attention will continue to be given to these patients with an emphasis on pre -dialysis counselling and preparation . a number of persons with diabetes will unfortunately develop diabetic kidney disease . persons who are deemed at risk of requiring renal replacement therapy should be referred to a clinic which will help educate and prepare them psychologically for this difficult transition in care . efforts will be made to establish a pre-dialysis clinic with education and support through a multi -disciplinary team . persons with diabetes requiring dialysis will receive the best support and care possible through the renal unit at mater dei hospital . recently the unit has extended its hours of service in order to continue to better meet the patients growing service needs . Prevention and management of foot complications patients with t2dm mellitus were found to be nearly 400 times more likely to undergo an initial minor toe ( transphalangeal ) amputation and had almost a 12-fold increased risk of a below -knee amputation . more than 60 % of lower-extremity amputations are believed to be attributable to t2dm . the 25-year cumulative incidence of lower-extremity amputation in people with t1dm was estimated ( in the wisconsin study ) to be 10.1 % . diabetes is also associated with worse outcomes in hospitalized patients with foot problems . in patients undergoing lower extremity bypass surgery , it is associated with worse outcome , longer hospital stays and higher costs . there is a need for a proper national foot screening programme to become established where all persons with diabetes are offered appointments in their local health centres for podiatric foot assessment with risk stratification and follow up intervals based on that risk assessment . the programme for diabetes should constitute first level screening and second level assessment . patients with diabetes would benefit from an initial assessment with subsequent follow ups according to risk stratification but some patients deemed to be at higher risk will benefit from more regular and specialized assessment and follow up . this first level screening should occur at all health centres and should include a vascular , neurological and biomechanical assessment . if vascular pathology that requires immediate intervention is confirmed , patients will be referred through a fast-track system for a full vascular assessment at mater dei vascular unit . closer attention will be given to foot biomechanics such that further service development to adopt preventive measures that can postpone the occurrence of foot complications shall take place in consultation with the professionals concerned . persons experiencing vascular complications should be able to access the necessary treatment without delay . this could include access to antibiotics and special dressings . orthotics and prosthesis persons who undergo surgery require appropriate support and rehabilitation . one of the key sources for such care is the orthotics and prosthetics unit . investment in upgrading of the orthotic and prosthetic facility will take place as part of the overall investment in the rehabilitation facility through a public -private partnership . investment in training of human resources will also be addressed as a priority for the strengthening of the multidisciplinary team for diabetes . allied health the role of allied health practitioners in the support of persons with diabetes ranges from primary prevention through education , to diagnosis in the laboratories , to provision of support at all stage of the illness . the allied health professionals play an important role in the management and improvement of care outcomes for diabetes . the main areas identified for priority investment in human resources are for dietitians , prosthetists and orthotic technicians . gozogozitan residents who are diabetic also deserve the best standards of care and management for their condition . although some outreach is presently performed there is a need to increase the presence of specialists on the island . whilst mater dei hospital remains the tertiary referral centre for all persons with diabetes in the maltese islands , it is also important that for uncomplicated t2dm , gozo also joins the shared care programme as this will allow routine follow up to be carried out to the same standard as being advocated for patients in malta . the setting up of a specialist diabetes service in gozo is a key priority in this strategy which will be achieved with the development of the gozo health hub through a public private partnership . mental health services diabetic patients with mental health problems will benefit from the envisioned improvements in the mental health sector . elderly persons with multimorbidity diabetes affects more than one in four persons over the age of 60 in malta . the management of diabetes in the elderly must be carried out in the background context of other conditions . care plans must be carefully developed where the treatment of hyperglycaemia should not be carried out in isolation but should be balanced with the risks of hypoglycaemia , falls fractures etc . the provision of drugs which have a low hypoglycaemia risk is also important in this regard and is an important priority that is already being addressed . specialized outreach clinics will be implemented in geriatric settings with improvement of the quality of care for elderly persons with diabetes elderly persons who are home bound and in need of support for insulin administration should be provided with simple regimes that are easy to administer and that can facilitate self-care and adherence . diabetes information system the capture of data on all patients with diabetes at a national level in a single information system allows active surveillance through personalized invitations for screening in order to encourage a high attendance . it will also allow measurement of progress i n attaining the set targets of the strategy , regular evaluation and benchmarking with other health care systems . therefore , every effort should be made to ensure the capture of data for all persons with diabetes in the information management system . this will require training and rolling out of access . it will be important to ensure that the data available in this system would be eventually integrated in the electronic medical record once this is developed at national health system level . initially , it is proposed that investment is made in a call/recall system that can allow patients to receive reminders to attend appointments , have blood investigation and access retinal and foot screening programmes . this system will be invaluable in identifying persons who are not being followed up and instituting active surveillance and outreach . as a result of these initiatives the following actions will be implemented : a high quality electronic health record for all patients with diabetes as part of the national health ict infrastructure the setting up of a call and recall system for setting appointments for eye and foot screening choice freedom to choose ones health care provider will remain an important principle since the doctor -patient relationship is key to a successful outcome in the management of diabetes . whilst patients will be offered the opportunity to access good quality health care offered free of charge through the diabetes clinics in health centres , it is recognized that some patients will prefer to remain under the care of their own private general practitioner or private specialist . it is nonetheless strongly recommended that all patients be encouraged to enroll in the national diabetes information system in order to access the opportunity for structured monitoring and screening on a regular basis . family doctors will have full access to individual patients ’ data on the diabetes information system with the patients consent . chapter6 : quality of life : the patient perspective in keeping with the who definition of health as a state of complete physical , mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity , the care for persons with diabetes needs to encompass not only the biological aspects of the disease , but psychosocial aspects too . the goal is to empower persons with diabetes by increasing their levels of self-efficacy and self-care . dietetic services dietary guidelines should be addressed immediately at diagnosis in order to introduce a healthy diet early on , especially when weight loss is required in obese persons . an increase in the complement of trained dieticians which is possible due to the implementation of local degree programmes and practical training in partnership between the university of malta and the ministry for energy and health will enable a quality leap in the dietetic services that can be offered . the use of personalized mobile technology ( mhealth ) can direct patients towards self-regulation in the choice of a healthy diet . persons with diabetes and their families also require access to routine visits offered by psychologists . such a service is particularly important for parents with children who are diagnosed with diabetes , the children themselves , adolescents , young adults and persons of all ages going through life transitions . some of these have no-one to turn to express their innermost struggle and difficulties . couples have encountered marital problems when their child becomes diagnosed with diabetes , older patients have had to deal with anger , frustration , denial , depression and rebellion all on their own , sometimes leading them to become anti-social and unresponsive to their own wellbeing . children and adolescents have to tackle bullying , denial of their condition so that they do not stand out as different form their friends , leading some to stop taking their insulin resorting to drugs and hiding their condition even from their most intimate friends and partners . furthermore , the health interview survey conducted in the maltese islands in 2008 showed that persons with diabetes have a higher prevalence of anxiety and depression . depression can affect the individual ’ s motivation to comply with diet and treatment leading to complications and further contributing to stress and anxiety . all health care professionals involved in the care of persons with diabetes should be trained to recognise the signs and symptoms of anxiety and depression . persons with diabetes , particularly those who are dependent on insulin will often encounter a crisis or a new situation which they feel ill-equipped to deal with . besides scheduled support for dietary and psychological advice , persons with diabetes know that the timely response to queries arising on a day-to-day basis is invaluable . In such circumstances , timely advice given over the phone may avert a visit , an admission or trigger the need for an urgent consultation . at present , an informal arrangement on a voluntary basis has been in place . given the burden on the providers of the service and the growing numbers of patients or relatives who could benefit from such a service , it is felt that a more formal arrangement ought to be established . a formal 24/7 nursing led support service will be established once sufficient trained human resources to staff the service are available . this would help persons who need quick advice over the phone . patient diabetes education ( pde ) has been shown to improve outcome indicators and ultimately the quality of life of persons with diabetes . they are effective by improving diabetes knowledge , lifestyle and psychosocial outcomes . holding these sessions in the community would be more accessible , and reduce the stigma associated with hospital-based care . education should be an integral part of the management of all people with diabetes : from around the time of diagnosis , on an ongoing basis , based on annual assessment of need , and on request . a trained multidisciplinary team can provide education to groups of people with diabetes , or individually if group work is considered unsuitable . where possible , family members or friends should be included . these should be led by health-care professionals with specialist training in diabetes and delivery of education for people with diabetes . it should be accessible to all people with diabetes , taking account of culture , ethnicity , psychosocial , and disability issues . education can be delivered in the community , and in different languages . techniques of active learning should be used , adapted to personal choices and learning styles . the use of modern communications technologies may advance the methods of delivery of diabetes education . persons living with diabetes do not only have rights but also duties and this is not always highlighted . it is important to instill in the person with diabetes that they should not hide their condition . the person with diabetes has to make their condition known to their immediate friends and colleagues at work . they should be informed on the symptoms of hypoglycemia and how to remedy it in cases of emergency . the employer on their part can take the necessary steps to ensure employee wellbeing by ensuring that the employee is not hindered in taking the necessary measures to control their diabetes , such as by providing a private space where they can monitor and inject . educating the general public on diabetes and removing the taboo attached to this condition would also address discrimination when it comes to job interviews . persons with diabetes can and do live normal everyday lives if they are well-controlled . prospective employers should not be wary of employing persons with diabetes especially if they are provided with proof that the person is well controlled . whatever the circumstances , it is important to carry identification on the medical condition . the maltese diabetes association distributes , free of charge , identification id stating that the holder is a person with diabetes . this would help prevent instances where someone with hypoglycemia is mistaken to be under the influence of mood-altering substances . initial first aid would also be more effective if those who assist or paramedics know that the person has diabetes . in addition , the department of diabetes and endocrinology and the diabetes education unit also give out identification cards with patients ’ details , emergency contact details , and current treatment and dose written on the card . persons experiencing personal or social difficulties in their life may also find it difficult to cope with their diabetes . persons who are socially excluded also need to be actively supported through the efforts of psychologists and social workers since failure to address their social problems will not allow for the attainment of successful outcomes in the management of their diabetes . in families and persons at-risk of poverty and low-income families , clinician recommendations might be completely disregarded due to the lack of resources . such circumstances are especially evident in families with small children and pensioners . often these persons need a friendly ear to turn to , someone who is willing to hear them out and encourage them to keep going and not give up as well as to guide them to sources of practical support . quality of life deteriorates once a person with diabetes develops complications due to a changed lifestyle . the burden on the person and the immediate family can not be quantified . they have to adjust to their new medical condition , frequent visits to their doctors and admissions to the hospital . social support for persons with diabetes who are experiencing a difficult social situation will help these persons maintain normoglycemic control and decrease the risk of complications . chapter 7 : paediatric diabetes epidemiology of childhood diabetes in malta t1dm is one of the commonest chronic conditions in childhood . the incidence of t1dm in malta during the period 2006 - 2010 in children under the age of 14 years is calculated to be 21.86/100,000/year , with the highest incidence registered in the 5–9-year-old age group . an annual increase in incidence over this period has been registered in children under ten years . the reasons for this increase in incidence are unknown , and this phenomenon has also been observed in other countries . the first diabetes clinic in a government hospital ( st luke 's hospital ) was set up in 1963. since 1969 diabetic children were managed by paediatricians or by physicians specialized in adult internal medicine . in 2006 , the responsibility of care of diabetic children was transferred to the department of paediatrics with the appointment of a consultant paediatric endocrinologist . since that time , the paediatric diabetes service ( pds ) has been involved in the care of 181 children with diabetes , 95 % of whom had t1dm . the upper age limit within the paediatric diabetes service was initially 14 years , but this was extended to 16 years in 2011. there are currently around 140 children under the age of 16 years with diabetes ( 94 % with t1dm ) who make use of the paediatric diabetes service . children with new-onset t1dm and their families require intensive diabetes education by a paediatric diabetes healthcare ( dhc ) team to provide them with the necessary skills and knowledge to manage this disease . the complex physical , developmental , and emotional needs of children and their families necessitate specialized care to ensure the best long-term outcomes . newly-diagnosed patients are admitted to the hospital for an average of 5 - 7 days for metabolic stabilization as well as intensive education of the family regarding diabetes care . during this initial period of hospitalization , each individual patient 's family receives an intensive , structured program of education that takes up 20 hours or more . on average , each child is reviewed around six times a year , although newly-diagnosed patients are seen much more frequently in the first few weeks after discharge from the hospital . very young children ( e.g . under 6 years of age ) also require more frequent review . relatively few patients miss outpatient appointments . in order to ensure that no children are lost to follow-up , those who miss appointments are contacted by phone and another appointment is given at the first available opportunity . a separate visiting consultant clinic is also held at gozo general hospital every 3-4 months in conjunction with the consultant paediatricians at that hospital . the introduction of point-of-care capillary blood testing for glycosylated hemoglobin ( hba1c ) in 2012 has allowed the measurement of hba1c every 2 – 3 months on all young children with diabetes . this has been found to be very useful in the management and education of young people with diabetes . the care and management of children and adolescents with diabetes are also focused towards preventing complications later on in life . the following table shows the recommended screening programme for children with diabetes as recommended by the international society for pediatric and adolescent diabetes . the management of childhood diabetes , especially t1dm , is extremely complex . young children with diabetes should be managed by a multidisciplinary team ( mdt ) lead by a doctor specialized in pediatric diabetes care . the royal college of nursing recommends that the complement of diabetes nurse specialists ( dns ) in a pediatric diabetes service should be 1.0 wte per 70 diabetic children ( royal college of nursing , 2005 ) . this means that the pediatric service at mater dei hospital should have two full-time diabetes nurse specialists . currently , children with diabetes are supported by the two diabetes nurse specialists who are expected to cater to the entire diabetic population in malta and gozo . it is envisaged that additional recruitment of diabetes nurse specialists will allow for a diabetes nurse to be dedicated solely for pediatric diabetes . all children with t1dm should receive counseling from a registered dietitian with a special interest in pediatric diabetes . children with diabetes should follow a healthy diet as recommended for children without diabetes . this involves consuming a variety of foods . there is no evidence that one form of nutrition therapy is superior to another in attaining age-appropriate glycemic targets . appropriate matching of insulin to carbohydrate content may allow increased flexibility and improved glycemic control . the effect of protein and fat on glucose absorption must also be considered . nutrition therapy should be individualized ( based on the child 's age , nutritional needs , eating habits , lifestyle , ability , and interest ) and must ensure normal growth and development without compromising glycemic control . this plan should be evaluated regularly and at least annually . as diabetes care can be very demanding on affected children and their families , these should also be reviewed regularly by a psychologist . anticipatory guidance and lifestyle counseling should be part of routine care , especially during critical developmental transitions ( e.g . upon school entry , leaving secondary school ) . psychologists should regularly initiate discussions with children and their families about school , psychological issues , substance use , obtaining a driver 's license , and career choices . achieving the appropriate human resource complement to cater adequately for children with diabetes has been identified as an immediate priority . increasing the competent health professional workforce is a necessary prerequisite to allow service improvements to be made , better support and care to be given to patients , and the introduction of innovative services such as an insulin pump service . the protocol for use within the public health service currently obliges clinicians to start newly-diagnosed children with diabetes on human insulin preparations . this means that all children have to start on a conventional twice-daily regimen , which is considered to have several disadvantages ( increased risk of hypoglycemia , increased risk of poor glycemic control , higher levels of glycosylated hemoglobin , more adverse long-term outcomes , etc. ) . current practice in centers of excellence around the world is to start children with t1dm on a multiple daily insulin regimen ( i.e . using insulin analogues ) or an insulin pump from the time of initial diagnosis . these regimens are associated with tighter glycemic control , fewer hypoglycemic episodes , better quality of life , and fewer long-term complications related to diabetes . the vast majority of young diabetic patients on a conventional twice-daily insulin regimen experience poor glycemic control and/or significant and recurrent hypoglycemic events . children with diabetes will henceforth be started immediately on an insulin analogue if this is deemed the best clinical option for that particular individual . any future introduction of an insulin pump service for children must be planned properly in advance and necessitates the availability of sufficient numbers of trained human resources . failure to introduce a service within the necessary safety standards would place patients at high risk . a detailed impact assessment of developing an insulin pump service will be carried out . children with diabetes are entitled to receive the following items free-of-charge through the public health service . the provision of these supplies is important to help children and their families in the daily management of their condition and the monitoring of blood glucose several times a day has been shown to improve long-term outcomes . children spend a substantial part of their day at school . this includes both winter and summer schools . children with diabetes are also encouraged to participate in out-of-school activities such as sports activities since these are important to help their integration and self-esteem besides keeping their blood glucose better controlled . during school hours , most children need to check their blood glucose at least once ( e.g . just before their midday break ) , and a number of them may also need to take an insulin dose just before they eat their school lunch . most children above eight years are able to understand the basics of diabetes care , check their own blood glucose with their glucose meter and are also competent in self-administration of subcutaneous insulin injections . on the other hand , younger children have to rely on a responsible adult who has some knowledge of diabetes care . efforts to reach a situation where every school has , at least , one person who is trained and certified competent in performing blood glucose measurement and administering insulin will be done . diabetes control may worsen during adolescence . factors responsible for this deterioration include adolescent adjustment issues , psychosocial distress , intentional insulin omission , and physiological insulin resistance . a careful multidisciplinary assessment should be undertaken for every child with chronic poor metabolic control to identify potential causative factors , such as depression and eating disorders , and to identify and address barriers to improved control . furthermore , adolescents with diabetes should receive regular counseling about sexual health and contraception . unplanned pregnancies should be avoided , as pregnancy in adolescent females with t1dm with suboptimal metabolic control may result in higher risks of maternal and fetal complications . the time of care transitioning from the paediatric diabetes service to the adult diabetes service is a sensitive one for adolescents with diabetes and their families . besides the difficulties of managing their diabetic condition which arise during this period , adolescents also need to cope with the changes brought about through the healthcare system as their care is taken over by the adult diabetic service . the change of physician or team can have a major impact on disease management and metabolic control in the person with diabetes with some young adults defaulting follow-up during the transition from paediatric to adult diabetes care services and being more likely to experience hospitalisation for dka during this period . organised transition services are important to avoid such episodes . the transition has been described as “ traumatic ” since from a relatively sheltered service catering for less than 200 persons , adolescents with t1dm find themselves being cared for in a service that has to cater for around 30,000 persons with diabetes . there is currently a lack of an established transfer mechanism for the care given to children who are 16 years and under , and to those who are in their late teens . this arises due to the transition of care from the children ’ s clinic to the adult diabetes clinics . at a time when these persons are passing through physical , emotional and lifestyle changes , they are thrust from a familiar atmosphere to one where they are expected to fit in with the rest of the diabetic patient population . the transition should be gradual and the handover done over a period of time . for this reasons a joint transition care clinic for adolescents with diabetes to move seamlessly from paediatric to adult services will be established . adolescents who are 18 and over should be encouraged to attend the clinic alone without the supervision of the parents in order to induce a more congenial atmosphere where the patient can be more relaxed and can open up without the fear of their parents ’ opinion . adolescents frequent places of leisure where self-management of diabetes may be compromised due to lack of access to a clean , secure and hygienic environment . operators of leisure and social facilities for young people should be made aware of the needs of adolescents with diabetes , and efforts should be made to provide safe facilities where monitoring and insulin administration may take place safely . diabetes is one of the commonest chronic conditions currently affecting the maltese population . research serves to provide the necessary evidence that allows innovation with the objective of preventing or delaying diabetes or its complications . whilst international evidence is very important in guiding standards of clinical practice , contextual factors profoundly affect incidence and management of diabetes . therefore , the need for local research that translates and tests international evidence in the local context is required . much local research has taken place over the past years . often this is not properly disseminated particularly if it is not published in impact factor peer-reviewed journals . the main priorities for research in diabetes that have been identified in the preparation of this strategy are the following : local genetics of diabetes and interaction between genetic predisposition and risk factors in the environment , reasons for increasing incidence of t1dm , motivational factors and compliance with diet or treatment regimens , national prevalence study of diabetes , ehealth or mhealth and diabetes management . through the national diabetes strategy , it is proposed to better organise and coordinate the efforts , resources , and expertise available in order to ensure larger more effective research projects . government bodies , academic institutions , practicing clinicians , industry , and ngos are encouraged to come together and pool their resources towards research projects which can have a significant impact at both national and international levels . prevalence data for persons with diabetes is sorely lacking at a national level . the last fully-fledged prevalence study took place under the auspices of the who monica project in the mid-1980s . a scientific prevalence study is required to understand the current epidemiology of diabetes in the maltese islands . the significant societal transitions being experienced also leave an impact on the epidemiology of diabetes . a special focus on distribution of diabetes in society will be incorporated in the prevalence study in order to investigate any inequalities and high-risk areas or population subgroups . this will enable better planning for health services in the area of diabetes as well as economic modelling related to the projected burden of disease . a diabetes prevalence study has been conducted in 2015. the findings from this study will serve to inform further actions and priorities in the coming years in the area of diabetes . innovative models of health promotion and health services organization and delivery for persons with diabetes need to be developed in order to achieve better results and outcomes for individuals and for society as a whole . these include research on the use of technology , including ict , to deliver enhanced preventive and supportive services for persons with diabetes . there is a pressing need to establish the necessary infrastructure for surveillance of diabetes at a national level . whilst for other chronic illnesses such as cancer , the existence of a truly national register for the past twenty years has allowed the reasonably accurate monitoring of incidence and outcomes this has yet to be developed for diabetes . a system of surveillance enables epidemiological trends to become immediately visible such that an appropriate response may be carried out in terms of service planning as well as public health interventions . it may also help to shed light on possible aetiological factors . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a disease that occurs when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is your main source of energy and comes from the food you eat . insulin , a hormone made by the pancreas , helps glucose from food get into your cells to be used for energy . sometimes your body doesn ’ t make enough—or any—insulin or doesn ’ t use insulin well . glucose then stays in your blood and doesn ’ t reach your cells . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . although diabetes has no cure , you can take steps to manage your diabetes and stay healthy . sometimes people call diabetes “ a touch of sugar ” or “ borderline diabetes. ” these terms suggest that someone doesn ’ t really have diabetes or has a less serious case , but every case of diabetes is serious . what are the different types of diabetes ? the most common types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . type 1 diabetes if you have type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin . your immune system attacks and destroys the cells in your pancreas that make insulin . type 1 diabetes is usually diagnosed in children and young adults , although it can appear at any age . people with type 1 diabetes need to take insulin every day to stay alive . type 2 diabetes : if you have type 2 diabetes , your body does not make or use insulin well . you can develop type 2 diabetes at any age , even during childhood . however , this type of diabetes occurs most often in middle-aged and older people . type 2 is the most common type of diabetes . gestational diabetes gestational diabetes develops in some women when they are pregnant . most of the time , this type of diabetes goes away after the baby is born . however , if you ’ ve had gestational diabetes , you have a greater chance of developing type 2 diabetes later in life . sometimes diabetes diagnosed during pregnancy is actually type 2 diabetes . other types of diabetes : less common types include monogenic diabetes , which is an inherited form of diabetes , and cystic fibrosis-related diabetes . how common is diabetes ? as of 2015 , 30.3 million people in the united states , or 9.4 percent of the population , had diabetes . more than 1 in 4 of them didn ’ t know they had the disease . diabetes affects 1 in 4 people over the age of 65. about 90-95 percent of cases in adults are type 2 diabetes . who is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes ? you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are age 45 or older , have a family history of diabetes , or are overweight . physical inactivity , race , and certain health problems such as high blood pressure also affect your chance of developing type 2 diabetes . you are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you have prediabetes or had gestational diabetes when you were pregnant . what health problems can people with diabetes develop ? over time , high blood glucose leads to problems such as heart disease , stroke , kidney disease , eye problems , dental disease , nerve damage , and foot problems . symptoms & causes : what are the symptoms of diabetes ? symptoms of diabetes include increased thirst and urination , increased hunger , fatigue , blurred vision , numbness or tingling in the feet or hands , sores that do not heal , and unexplained weight loss . symptoms of type 1 diabetes can start quickly , in a matter of weeks . symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly over the course of several years and can be so mild that you might not even notice them . many people with type 2 diabetes have no symptoms . some people do not find out they have the disease until they have diabetes-related health problems , such as blurred vision or heart trouble . what causes type 1 diabetes ? type 1 diabetes occurs when your immune system , the body 's system for fighting infection , attacks and destroys the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas . scientists think type 1 diabetes is caused by genes and environmental factors , such as viruses , that might trigger the disease . studies such as trialnet are working to pinpoint causes of type 1 diabetes and possible ways to prevent or slow the disease . what causes type 2 diabetes ? type 2 diabetes—the most common form of diabetes—is caused by several factors , including lifestyle factors and genes . overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity : you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are not physically active and are overweight or obese . extra weight sometimes causes insulin resistance and is common in people with type 2 diabetes . the location of body fat also makes a difference . extra belly fat is linked to insulin resistance , type 2 diabetes , and heart and blood vessel disease . to see if your weight puts you at risk for type 2 diabetes , check out these body mass index ( bmi ) charts . insulin resistance : type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance , a condition in which muscle , liver , and fat cells do not use insulin well . as a result , your body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas makes more insulin to keep up with the added demand . over time , the pancreas ca n't make enough insulin , and blood glucose levels rise . genes and family history : as in type 1 diabetes , certain genes may make you more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . the disease tends to run in families and occurs more often in these racial/ethnic groups : african americans , alaska natives , american indians , asian americans , hispanics/latinos , native hawaiians , pacific islanders . genes also can increase the risk of type 2 diabetes by increasing a person 's tendency to become overweight or obese . what causes gestational diabetes ? scientists believe gestational diabetes , a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy , is caused by the hormonal changes of pregnancy along with genetic and lifestyle factors . insulin resistance : hormones produced by the placenta contribute to insulin resistance , which occurs in all women during late pregnancy . most pregnant women can produce enough insulin to overcome insulin resistance , but some can not . gestational diabetes occurs when the pancreas ca n't make enough insulin . as with type 2 diabetes , extra weight is linked to gestational diabetes . women who are overweight or obese may already have insulin resistance when they become pregnant . gaining too much weight during pregnancy may also be a factor . genes and family history : having a family history of diabetes makes it more likely that a woman will develop gestational diabetes , which suggests that genes play a role . genes may also explain why the disorder occurs more often in african americans , american indians , asians , and hispanics/latinas . what else can cause diabetes ? genetic mutations , other diseases , damage to the pancreas , and certain medicines may also cause diabetes . genetic mutations , hormonal changes , extra weight , and family history can contribute to gestational diabetes . monogenic diabetes is caused by mutations , or changes , in a single gene . these changes are usually passed through families , but sometimes the gene mutation happens on its own . most of these gene mutations cause diabetes by making the pancreas less able to make insulin . the most common types of monogenic diabetes are neonatal diabetes and maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) . neonatal diabetes occurs in the first 6 months of life . doctors usually diagnose mody during adolescence or early adulthood , but sometimes the disease is not diagnosed until later in life . cystic fibrosis produces thick mucus that causes scarring in the pancreas . this scarring can prevent the pancreas from making enough insulin . hemochromatosis causes the body to store too much iron . if the disease is not treated , iron can build up in and damage the pancreas and other organs . hormonal diseases : some hormonal diseases cause the body to produce too much of certain hormones , which sometimes cause insulin resistance and diabetes . cushing 's syndrome occurs when the body produces too much cortisol—often called the stress hormone . acromegaly occurs when the body produces too much growth hormone . hyperthyroidism occurs when the thyroid gland produces too much thyroid hormone . damage to or removal of the pancreas : pancreatitis , pancreatic cancer , and trauma can all harm the beta cells or make them less able to produce insulin , resulting in diabetes . if the damaged pancreas is removed , diabetes will occur due to the loss of the beta cells . medicines : sometimes certain medicines can harm beta cells or disrupt the way insulin works . these include niacin , a type of vitamin b3 ; certain types of diuretics , also called water pills ; anti-seizure drugs ; psychiatric drugs ; drugs to treat human immunodeficiency virus ( hiv ) ; pentamidine , a drug used to treat a type of pneumonia ; glucocorticoids—medicines used to treat inflammatory illnesses such as rheumatoid arthritis , asthma , lupus , and ulcerative colitis ; anti-rejection medicines , used to help stop the body from rejecting a transplanted organ ; statins , which are medicines to reduce ldl ( bad ) cholesterol levels , can slightly increase the chance that you 'll develop diabetes . however , statins help protect you from heart disease and stroke . for this reason , the strong benefits of taking statins outweigh the small chance that you could develop diabetes . if you take any of these medicines and are concerned about their side effects , talk with your doctor . risk factors for type 2 diabetes your chances of developing type 2 diabetes depend on a combination of risk factors such as your genes and lifestyle . although you ca n't change risk factors such as family history , age , or ethnicity , you can change lifestyle risk factors around eating , physical activity , and weight . these lifestyle changes can affect your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . read about risk factors for type 2 diabetes below and see which ones apply to you . taking action on the factors you can change can help you delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are overweight or obese , are age 45 or older , have a family history of diabetes , are african american , alaska native , american indian , asian american , hispanic/latino , native hawaiian , or pacific islander , have high blood pressure , have a low level of hdl ( good ) cholesterol , or a high level of triglycerides , have a history of gestational diabetes or gave birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more , are not physically active , have a history of heart disease or stroke , have depression , have polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) , have acanthosis nigricans—dark , thick , and velvety skin around your neck or armpits . you can also take the diabetes risk test to learn about your risk for type 2 diabetes . to see if your weight puts you at risk for type 2 diabetes , find your height in the body mass index ( bmi ) charts below . if your weight is equal to or more than the weight listed , you have a greater chance of developing the disease . what can i do to prevent type 2 diabetes ? you can take steps to help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by losing weight if you are overweight , eating fewer calories , and being more physically active . talk with your health care professional about any of the health conditions listed above that may require medical treatment . managing these health problems may help reduce your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . also , ask your health care professional about ways to reduce your risk of type 2 diabetes , such as : maintain a healthy weight : if you are overweight , losing even a small amount of weight ( 5-10 % of your total body weight ) can significantly reduce your risk . healthy eating : adopt a balanced and nutritious diet . focus on whole foods , such as fruits , vegetables , whole grains , lean proteins , and healthy fats . limit your intake of processed foods , sugary beverages , and high-calorie snacks . regular physical activity : engage in regular physical activity , such as brisk walking , jogging , swimming , or cycling . aim for at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week . monitor blood sugar levels : if you have prediabetes , work with your health care team to monitor your blood sugar levels regularly . this can help you make necessary lifestyle changes and , if needed , start medication to manage your blood sugar . also , ask your healthcare professional about any medicines you take that might increase your risk . preventing type 2 diabetes : perhaps you have learned that you have a high chance of developing type 2 diabetes , the most common type of diabetes . you might be overweight or have a parent , brother , or sister with type 2 diabetes . maybe you had gestational diabetes , which is diabetes that develops during pregnancy . these are just a few examples of factors that can raise your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . diabetes can cause serious health problems , such as heart disease , stroke , and eye and foot problems . prediabetes also can cause health problems . the good news is that type 2 diabetes can be delayed or even prevented . the longer you have diabetes , the more likely you are to develop health problems , so delaying diabetes by even a few years will benefit your health . you can help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by losing a modest amount of weight by following a reduced-calorie eating plan and being physically active most days of the week . ask your doctor if you should take the diabetes drug metformin to help prevent or delay type 2 diabetes . how can i lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes ? research , such as the diabetes prevention program , shows that you can do a lot to reduce your chances of developing type 2 diabetes . here are some things you can change to lower your risk : lose weight and keep it off . you may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 7 percent of your starting weight . for instance , if you weigh 200 pounds , your goal would be to lose about 10 to 14 pounds . move more . get at least 30 minutes of physical activity 5 days a week . if you have not been active , talk with your healthcare professional about which activities are best . start slowly to build up to your goal . eat healthy foods most of the time . eat smaller portions to reduce the amount of calories you eat each day and help you lose weight . choosing foods with less fat is another way to reduce calories . drink water instead of sweetened beverages . ask your healthcare professional about what other changes you can make to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes . most often , your best chance for preventing type 2 diabetes is to make lifestyle changes that work for you long term . get started with your game plan to prevent type 2 diabetes . losing weight through healthy eating and regular physical activity can help you prevent type 2 diabetes . what should i do if my healthcare professional told me i have prediabetes ? prediabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes . having prediabetes is serious because it raises your chance of developing type 2 diabetes . many of the same factors that raise your chance of developing type 2 diabetes put you at risk for prediabetes . other names for prediabetes include impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance . some people call prediabetes borderline diabetes . about 1 in 3 americans has prediabetes , according to recent diabetes statistics from the centers for disease control and prevention . you wo n't know if you have prediabetes unless you are tested . if you have prediabetes , you can lower your chance of developing type 2 diabetes . lose weight if you need to , become more physically active , and follow a reduced-calorie eating plan . get started with your game plan to prevent type 2 diabetes . for more support , you can find a lifestyle change program near you through the national diabetes prevention program . if i had gestational diabetes when i was pregnant , how can i lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes ? gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy . most of the time , gestational diabetes goes away after your baby is born . even if your gestational diabetes goes away , you still have a greater chance of developing type 2 diabetes within 5 to 10 years . your child may also be more likely to become obese and develop type 2 diabetes later in life . making healthy choices helps the whole family and may protect your child from becoming obese or developing diabetes . get tested for diabetes 6 to 12 weeks after your baby is born . if your blood glucose is still high , you may have type 2 diabetes . if your blood glucose is normal , you should get tested every 3 years to see if you have developed type 2 diabetes . be more active and make healthy food choices to get back to a healthy weight . breastfeed your baby . breastfeeding gives your baby the right balance of nutrients and helps you burn calories . ask your doctor if you should take the diabetes drug metformin to help prevent type 2 diabetes . references : diabetes prevention program research group . long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up : the diabetes prevention program outcomes study . being physically active together is a great way to lower your own and your child 's chance of developing type 2 diabetes . diabetes prevention program research group . long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up : the diabetes prevention program outcomes study . diabetes tests & diagnosis : your healthcare professional can diagnose diabetes , prediabetes , and gestational diabetes through blood tests . the blood tests show if your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . do not try to diagnose yourself if you think you might have diabetes . testing equipment that you can buy over the counter , such as a blood glucose meter , can not diagnose diabetes . who should be tested for diabetes ? anyone who has symptoms of diabetes should be tested for the disease . some people will not have any symptoms but may have risk factors for diabetes and need to be tested . testing allows healthcare professionals to find diabetes sooner and work with their patients to manage diabetes and prevent complications . testing also allows healthcare professionals to find prediabetes . making lifestyle changes to lose a modest amount of weight if you are overweight may help you delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . type 1 diabetes : most often , testing for occurs in people with diabetes symptoms . doctors usually diagnose type 1 diabetes in children and young adults . because type 1 diabetes can run in families , a study called trialnet offers free testing to family members of people with the disease , even if they do n't have symptoms . blood tests help healthcare professionals diagnose diabetes and prediabetes . type 2 diabetes : experts recommend routine testing for type 2 diabetes if you are age 45 or older , are between the ages of 19 and 44 , are overweight or obese , and have one or more other diabetes risk factors . if you are a woman who had gestational diabetes , medicare covers the cost of diabetes tests for people with certain risk factors for diabetes . if you have medicare , find out if you qualify for coverage . if you have different insurance , ask your insurance company if it covers diabetes tests . though type 2 diabetes most often develops in adults , children also can develop type 2 diabetes . experts recommend testing children between the ages of 10 and 18 who are overweight or obese and have at least two other risk factors for developing diabetes . low birthweight , a mother who had diabetes while pregnant with them , any risk factor mentioned in risk factors for type 2 diabetes , gestational diabetes : all pregnant women who do not have a prior diabetes diagnosis should be tested for gestational diabetes . if you are pregnant , you will take a glucose challenge test between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy . what tests are used to diagnose diabetes and prediabetes ? healthcare professionals most often use the fasting plasma glucose ( fpg ) test or the a1c test to diagnose diabetes . in some cases , they may use a random plasma glucose ( rpg ) test . fasting plasma glucose ( fpg ) test : the fpg blood test measures your blood glucose level at a single point in time . for the most reliable results , it is best to have this test in the morning , after you fast for at least 8 hours . fasting means having nothing to eat or drink except sips of water . a1c test : the a1c test is a blood test that provides your average levels of blood glucose over the past 3 months . other names for the a1c test are hemoglobin a1c , hba1c , glycated hemoglobin , and glycosylated hemoglobin test . you can eat and drink before this test . when it comes to using the a1c to diagnose diabetes , your doctor will consider factors such as your age and whether you have anemia or another problem with your blood . the a1c test is not accurate in people with anemia . if you 're of african , mediterranean , or southeast asian descent , your a1c test results may be falsely high or low . your healthcare professional may need to order a different type of a1c test . your healthcare professional will report your a1c test result as a percentage , such as an a1c of 7 percent . the higher the percentage , the higher your average blood glucose levels . people with diabetes also use information from the a1c test to help manage their diabetes . random plasma glucose ( rpg ) test : sometimes healthcare professionals use the rpg test to diagnose diabetes when diabetes symptoms are present and they do not want to wait until you have fasted . you do not need to fast overnight for the rpg test . you may have this blood test at any time . what tests are used to diagnose gestational diabetes ? pregnant women may have the glucose challenge test , the oral glucose tolerance test , or both . these tests show how well your body handles glucose . glucose challenge test : if you are pregnant and a healthcare professional is checking you for gestational diabetes , you may first receive the glucose challenge test . another name for this test is the glucose screening test . in this test , a healthcare professional will draw your blood 1 hour after you drink a sweet liquid containing glucose . you do not need to fast for this test . if your blood glucose is too high ( 135 to 140 or more ) , you may need to return for an oral glucose tolerance test while fasting . oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : the ogtt measures blood glucose after you fast for at least 8 hours . first , a healthcare professional will draw your blood . then you will drink the liquid containing glucose . for diagnosing gestational diabetes , you will need your blood drawn every hour for 2 to 3 hours . high blood glucose levels at any two or more blood test times during the ogtt—fasting , 1 hour , 2 hours , or 3 hours—mean you have gestational diabetes . your health care team will explain what your ogtt results mean . healthcare professionals also can use the ogtt to diagnose type 2 diabetes and prediabetes in people who are not pregnant . the ogtt helps healthcare professionals detect type 2 diabetes and prediabetes better than the fpg test . however , the ogtt is a more expensive test and is not as easy to give . to diagnose type 2 diabetes and prediabetes , a healthcare professional will need to draw your blood 1 hour after you drink the liquid containing glucose and again after 2 hours . what test numbers tell me if i have diabetes or prediabetes ? each test to detect diabetes and prediabetes uses a different measurement . usually , the same test method needs to be repeated on a second day to diagnose diabetes . your doctor may also use a second test method to confirm that you have diabetes . to diagnose gestational diabetes , healthcare professionals give more glucose to drink and use different numbers as cutoffs . source : adapted from american diabetes association . classification and diagnosis of diabetes . which tests help my healthcare professional know what kind of diabetes i have ? even though the tests described here can confirm that you have diabetes , they ca n't identify what type you have . sometimes healthcare professionals are unsure if diabetes is type 1 or type 2. a rare type of diabetes that can occur in babies , called monogenic diabetes can also be mistaken for type 1 diabetes . treatment depends on the type of diabetes , so knowing which type you have is important . to find out if your diabetes is type 1 , your healthcare professional may look for certain autoantibodies . autoantibodies are antibodies that mistakenly attack your healthy tissues and cells . the presence of one or more of several types of autoantibodies specific to diabetes is common in type 1 diabetes , but not in type 2 or monogenic diabetes . a healthcare professional will have to draw your blood for this test . if you had diabetes while you were pregnant , you should get tested 6 to 12 weeks after your baby is born to see if you have type 2 diabetes . managing diabetes : you can manage your diabetes and live a long and healthy life by taking care of yourself each day . diabetes can affect almost every part of your body . therefore , you will need to manage your blood glucose levels , also called blood sugar . how can i manage my diabetes ? with the help of your health care team , you can create a diabetes self-care plan to manage your diabetes . your self-care plan may include these steps : manage your diabetes abcs ; follow your diabetes meal plan ; make physical activity part of your routine ; take your medicine ; check your blood glucose levels ; work with your health care team ; cope with your diabetes in healthy ways ; manage your diabetes abcs ; knowing your diabetes abcs will help you manage your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol . stopping smoking if you smoke will also help you manage your diabetes . working toward your abc goals can help lower your chances of having a heart attack , stroke , or other diabetes problems . for the a1c test : the a1c test shows your average blood glucose level over the past 3 months . the a1c goal for many people with diabetes is below 7 percent . ask your health care team what your goal should be . for blood pressure : the blood pressure goal for most people with diabetes is below 140/90 mm hg . ask what your goal should be . for cholesterol : you have two kinds of cholesterol in your blood : ldl and hdl . ldl or bad cholesterol can build up and clog your blood vessels . too much bad cholesterol can cause a heart attack or stroke . hdl or good cholesterol helps remove the bad cholesterol from your blood vessels . ask your health care team what your cholesterol numbers should be . if you are over 40 years of age , you may need to take a statin drug for heart health . for stop smoking : not smoking is especially important for people with diabetes because both smoking and diabetes narrow blood vessels . blood vessel narrowing makes your heart work harder . e-cigarettes are n't a safe option either . if you quit smoking , you will lower your risk for heart attack , stroke , nerve disease , kidney disease , diabetic eye disease , and amputation . your cholesterol and blood pressure levels may improve , and your blood circulation will improve . you may have an easier time being physically active . if you smoke or use other tobacco products , stop . ask for help so you do n't have to do it alone . keeping your a1c , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels close to your goals and stopping smoking may help prevent the long-term harmful effects of diabetes . these health problems include heart disease , stroke , kidney disease , nerve damage , and eye disease . you can keep track of your abcs with a diabetes care record . take it with you on your health care visits . talk about your goals and how you are doing , and whether you need to make any changes in your diabetes care plan . follow your diabetes meal plan : make a diabetes meal plan with help from your health care team . following a meal plan will help you manage your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol . choose fruits and vegetables , beans , whole grains , chicken or turkey without the skin , fish , lean meats , and nonfat or low-fat milk and cheese . drink water instead of sugar-sweetened beverages . choose foods that are lower in calories , saturated fat , trans fat , sugar , and salt . learn more about eating , diet , and nutrition with diabetes . make physical activity part of your daily routine : set a goal to be more physically active . try to work up to 30 minutes or more of physical activity on most days of the week . brisk walking and swimming are good ways to move more . if you are not active now , ask your health care team about the types and amounts of physical activity that are right for you . learn more about being physically active with diabetes . following your meal plan and being more active can help you stay at or get to a healthy weight . if you are overweight or obese , work with your health care team to create a weight-loss plan that is right for you . take your medicine : take your medicines for diabetes and any other health problems , even when you feel good or have reached your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol goals . these medicines help you manage your abcs . ask your doctor if you need to take aspirin to prevent a heart attack or stroke . tell your health care professional if you can not afford your medicines or if you have any side effects from your medicines . learn more about insulin and other diabetes medicines . swimming or water walking is a good way to move more . check your blood glucose levels : for many people with diabetes , checking their blood glucose level each day is an important way to manage their diabetes . monitoring your blood glucose level is most important if you take insulin . the results of blood glucose monitoring can help you make decisions about food , physical activity , and medicines . the most common way to check your blood glucose level at home is with a blood glucose meter . you get a drop of blood by pricking the side of your fingertip with a lancet . then you apply the blood to a test strip . the meter will show you how much glucose is in your blood at the moment . ask your health care team how often you should check your blood glucose levels . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . you can print copies of this glucose self-check chart . take these records with you when you visit your health care team . what is continuous glucose monitoring ? continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) is another way to check your glucose levels . most cgm systems use a tiny sensor that you insert under your skin . the sensor measures glucose levels in the fluids between your body 's cells every few minutes and can show changes in your glucose level throughout the day and night . if the cgm system shows that your glucose is too high or too low , you should check your glucose with a blood glucose meter before making any changes to your checking and recording your blood glucose level is an important part of managing diabetes . eating plan , physical activity , or medicines . a cgm system is especially useful for people who use insulin and have problems with low blood glucose . what are the recommended targets for blood glucose levels ? many people with diabetes aim to keep their blood glucose at these normal levels : before a meal : 80 to 130 mg/dl about 2 hours after a meal starts : less than 180 mg/dl . talk with your health care team about the best target range for you . be sure to tell your health care professional if your glucose levels often go above or below your target range . what happens if my blood glucose level becomes too low ? sometimes blood glucose levels drop below where they should be , which is called hypoglycemia . for most people with diabetes , the blood glucose level is too low when it is below 70 mg/dl . hypoglycemia can be life-threatening and needs to be treated right away . learn more about how to recognize and treat hypoglycemia . what happens if my blood glucose level becomes too high ? doctors call high blood glucose hyperglycemia . symptoms that your blood glucose levels may be too high include : feeling thirsty ; feeling tired or weak ; headaches ; urinating often ; blurred vision . if you often have high blood glucose levels or symptoms of high blood glucose , talk with your health care team . you may need a change in your diabetes meal plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . know when to check for ketones . your doctor may want you to check your urine for ketones if you have symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis . when ketone levels get too high , you can develop this life-threatening condition . symptoms include : trouble breathing ; nausea or vomiting ; pain in your abdomen ; confusion ; feeling very tired or sleepy . ketoacidosis most often is a problem for people with type 1 diabetes . work with your health care team . most people with diabetes get health care from a primary care professional . primary care professionals include internists , family physicians , and pediatricians . sometimes physician assistants and nurses with extra training , called nurse practitioners , provide primary care . you also will need to see other care professionals from time to time . a team of health care professionals can help you improve your diabetes self-care . remember , you are the most important member of your health care team . besides a primary care professional , your health care team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care , a registered dietitian , also called a nutritionist , a nurse , a certified diabetes educator , a pharmacist , a dentist , an eye doctor , a podiatrist , or foot doctor , for foot care , a social worker , who can help you find financial aid for treatment and community resources , a counselor , or other mental health care professional . when you see members of your health care team , ask questions . write a list of questions you have before your visit so you do n't forget what you want to ask . watch a video to help you get ready for your diabetes care visit . you should see your health care team at least twice a year , and more often if you are having problems or are having trouble reaching your blood glucose , blood pressure , or cholesterol goals . at each visit , be sure you have a blood pressure check , foot check , and weight check ; and review your self-care plan . talk with your health care team about your medicines and whether you need to adjust them . routine health care will help you find and treat any health problems early or may be able to help prevent them . talk with your doctor about what vaccines you should get to keep from getting sick , such as a flu shot and pneumonia shot . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . your blood glucose levels are more likely to go up when you 're sick or have an infection . learn more about taking care of your diabetes when you 're sick and during other special times , such as when you 're traveling . cope with your diabetes in healthy ways : feeling stressed , sad , or angry is common when you live with diabetes . stress can raise your blood glucose levels , but you can learn ways to lower your stress . try deep breathing , gardening , taking a walk , doing yoga , meditating , doing a hobby , or listening to your favorite music . consider taking part in a diabetes education program or support group that teaches you techniques for managing stress . learn more about healthy ways to cope with stress . depression is common among people with a chronic , or long-term , illness . depression can get in the way of your efforts to manage your diabetes . ask for help if you feel down . a mental health counselor , support group , clergy member , friend , or family member who will listen to your feelings may help you feel better . try to get 7 to 8 hours of sleep each night . getting enough sleep can help improve your mood and energy level . you can take steps to improve your sleep habits . if you often feel sleepy during the day , you may have obstructive sleep apnea , a condition in which your breathing briefly stops many times during the night . sleep apnea is common in people who have diabetes . talk with your health care team if you think you have a sleep problem . remember , managing diabetes is n't easy , but it 's worth it . insulin , medicines , & other diabetes treatments : taking insulin or other diabetes medicines is often part of treating diabetes . along with healthy food choices and physical activity , medicine can help you manage the disease . some other treatment options are also available . what medicines might i take for diabetes ? the medicine you take will vary by your type of diabetes and how well the medicine controls your blood glucose levels , also called blood sugar . other factors , such as your other health conditions , medication costs , and your daily schedule , may play a role in what diabetes medicine you take . type 1 diabetes : if you have type 1 diabetes , you must take insulin because your body no longer makes this hormone . you will need to take insulin several times during the day , including with meals . you could also use an insulin pump , which gives you small , steady doses throughout the day . type 2 diabetes : some people with type 2 diabetes can manage their disease by making healthy food choices and being more physically active . many people with type 2 diabetes need diabetes medicines as well . these medicines may include diabetes pills or medicines you inject under your skin , such as insulin . in time , you may need more than one diabetes medicine to control your blood glucose . even if you do not take insulin , you may need it at special times , such as during pregnancy or if you are in the hospital . gestational diabetes : if you have gestational diabetes , you should first try to control your blood glucose level by making healthy food choices and getting regular physical activity . if you ca n't reach your blood glucose target , your health care team will talk with you about diabetes medicines , such as insulin or the diabetes pill metformin , that may be safe for you to take during pregnancy . your health care team may start you on diabetes medicines right away if your blood glucose is very high . no matter what type of diabetes you have , taking diabetes medicines every day can feel like a burden sometimes . you may also need medicines for other health problems , such as high blood pressure or high cholesterol , as part of your diabetes care plan . view resources that may help you manage your medication plan . what are the different types of insulin ? several types of insulin are available . each type starts to work at a different speed , known as onset , and its effects last a different length of time , known as duration . most types of insulin reach a peak , which is when they have the strongest effect . then the effects of the insulin wear off over the next few hours or so . types of insulin and how they work : rapid-acting : about 15 minutes after injection ; 1 hour peak ; 2 to 4 hours duration . short-acting , also called regular : within 30 minutes after injection ; 2 to 3 hours peak ; 3 to 6 hours duration . intermediate-acting : 2 to 4 hours after injection ; 4 to 12 hours peak ; 12 to 18 hours duration . long-acting : several hours after injection ; does not peak ; 24 hours duration ; some last longer . the chart above gives averages . follow your doctor 's advice on when and how to take your insulin . your doctor might also recommend premixed insulin , which is a mix of two types of insulin . some types of insulin cost more than others , so talk with your doctor about your options if you 're concerned about cost . what are the different ways to take insulin ? the way you take insulin may depend on your lifestyle , insurance plan , and preferences . you may decide that needles are not for you and prefer a different method . talk with your doctor about the options and which is best for you . most people with diabetes use a needle and syringe , pen , or insulin pump . inhalers , injection ports , and jet injectors are less common . needle and syringe : you 'll give yourself insulin shots using a needle and syringe . you will draw up your dose of insulin from the vial , or bottle , into the syringe . insulin works fastest when you inject it in your belly , but you should rotate spots where you inject insulin . other injection spots include your thigh , buttocks , or upper arm . some people with diabetes who take insulin need two to four shots a day to reach their blood glucose targets . others can take a single shot . pen : an insulin pen looks like a pen but has a needle for its point . some insulin pens come filled with insulin and are disposable . others have room for an insulin cartridge that you insert and then replace after use . insulin pens cost more than needles and syringes , but many people find them easier to use . insulin shots involve drawing insulin from a vial into a syringe and then injecting it under your skin . pump : an insulin pump is a small machine that gives you small , steady doses of insulin throughout the day . you wear one type of pump outside your body on a belt or in a pocket or pouch . the insulin pump connects to a small plastic tube and a very small needle . you insert the needle under your skin , and it stays in place for several days . insulin then pumps from the machine through the tube into your body 24 hours a day . you also can give yourself doses of insulin through the pump at mealtimes . another type of pump has no tubes and attaches directly to your skin , such as a self-adhesive pod . an insulin pen is a convenient way to take insulin ; insulin pumps deliver insulin 24 hours a day . inhaler : another way to take insulin is by breathing powdered insulin from an inhaler device into your mouth . the insulin goes into your lungs and moves quickly into your blood . inhaled insulin is only for adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes . injection port : an injection port has a short tube that you insert into the tissue beneath your skin . on the skin 's surface , an adhesive patch or dressing holds the port in place . you inject insulin through the port with a needle and syringe or an insulin pen . the port stays in place for a few days , and then you replace the port . with an injection port , you no longer puncture your skin for each shot—only when you apply a new port . jet injector : this device sends a fine spray of insulin into the skin at high pressure instead of using a needle to deliver the insulin . what oral medicines treat type 2 diabetes ? you may need medicines along with healthy eating and physical activity habits to manage your type 2 diabetes . you can take many diabetes medicines by mouth . these medicines are called oral medicines . most people with type 2 diabetes start medical treatment with metformin pills . metformin also comes as a liquid . metformin lowers the amount of glucose that your liver makes and helps your body use insulin better . this drug may help you lose a small amount of weight . other oral medicines act in different ways to lower blood glucose levels . you may need to add another diabetes medicine after a while or use a combination treatment . combining two or three kinds of diabetes medicines can lower blood glucose levels more than taking just one . read about different kinds of diabetes medicines from the food and drug administration ( fda ) . what other injectable medicines treat type 2 diabetes ? besides insulin , other types of injected medicines are available . these medicines help keep your blood glucose level from going too high after you eat . they may make you feel less hungry and help you lose some weight . other injectable medicines are not substitutes for insulin . learn more about noninsulin injectable medicines . what should i know about side effects of diabetes medicines ? side effects are problems that result from a medicine . some diabetes medicines can cause hypoglycemia , also called low blood glucose , if you do n't balance your medicines with food and activity . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicine can cause hypoglycemia or other side effects , such as upset stomach and weight gain . take your diabetes medicines as your health care professional has instructed you , to help prevent side effects and diabetes problems . do i have other treatment options for my diabetes ? when medicines and lifestyle changes are not enough to manage your diabetes , a less common treatment may be an option . other treatments include bariatric surgery for certain people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes , an `` artificial pancreas , '' and pancreatic islet transplantation for some people with type 1 diabetes . bariatric surgery : also called weight-loss surgery or metabolic surgery , bariatric surgery may help some people with obesity and type 2 diabetes lose a large amount of weight and regain normal blood glucose levels . some people with diabetes may no longer need their diabetes medicine after bariatric surgery . whether and for how long blood glucose levels improve seems to vary by the patient , type of weight-loss surgery , and amount of weight the person loses . other factors include how long someone has had diabetes and whether or not the person uses insulin . recent research suggests that weight-loss surgery also may help improve blood glucose control in people with type 1 diabetes who are obese . researchers are studying the long-term results of bariatric surgery in people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes . artificial pancreas : the niddk has played an important role in developing artificial pancreas technology . an artificial pancreas replaces manual blood glucose testing and the use of insulin shots or a pump . a single system monitors blood glucose levels around the clock and provides insulin or a combination of insulin and a second hormone , glucagon , automatically . the system can also be monitored remotely , for example , by parents or medical staff . in 2016 , the fda approved a type of artificial pancreas system called a hybrid closed-loop system . this system tests your glucose level every 5 minutes throughout the day and night and automatically gives you the right amount of insulin . you still need to manually adjust the amount of insulin the pump delivers at mealtimes . but , the artificial pancreas may free you from some of the daily tasks needed to keep your blood glucose stable—or help you sleep through the night without the need to wake and test your glucose or take medicine . the hybrid closed-loop system is expected to be available in the u.s. in 2017. talk with your health care provider about whether this system might be right for you . the niddk has funded several important studies on different types of artificial pancreas devices to better help people with type 1 diabetes manage their disease . the devices may also help people with type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes . pancreatic islet transplantation : pancreatic islet transplantation is an experimental treatment for poorly controlled type 1 diabetes . pancreatic islets are clusters of cells in the pancreas that make the hormone insulin . in type 1 diabetes , the body 's immune system attacks these cells . a pancreatic islet transplant replaces destroyed islets with new ones that make and release insulin . this procedure takes islets from the pancreas of an organ donor and transfers them to a person with type 1 diabetes . because researchers are still studying pancreatic islet transplantation , the procedure is only available to people enrolled in research studies . learn more about islet transplantation studies . becoming more active and making changes in what you eat and drink can seem challenging at first . you may find it easier to start with small changes and get help from your family , friends , and health care team . eating well and being physically active most days of the week can help you keep your blood glucose level , blood pressure , and cholesterol in your target ranges ; lose weight or stay at a healthy weight ; prevent or delay diabetes problems ; and feel good and have more energy . what foods can i eat if i have diabetes ? you may worry that having diabetes means going without foods you enjoy . the good news is that you can still eat your favorite foods , but you might need to eat smaller portions or enjoy them less often . your health care team will help create a diabetes meal plan for you that meets your needs and likes . the key to eating with diabetes is to eat a variety of healthy foods from all food groups , in the amounts your meal plan outlines . the food groups are : vegetables ( nonstarchy ) : includes broccoli , carrots , greens , peppers , and tomatoes . vegetables ( starchy ) : includes potatoes , corn , and green peas . fruits : includes oranges , melon , berries , apples , bananas , and grapes . grains : at least half of your grains for the day should be whole grains , includes wheat , rice , oats , cornmeal , barley , and quinoa . examples : bread , pasta , cereal , and tortillas . protein : lean meat , chicken or turkey without the skin , fish , eggs , nuts and peanuts , dried beans , and certain peas , such as chickpeas and split peas . meat substitutes , such as tofu . dairy : nonfat or low-fat milk or lactose-free milk if you have lactose intolerance , yogurt , cheese . eat foods with heart-healthy fats , which mainly come from these foods : oils that are liquid at room temperature , such as canola and olive oil ; nuts and seeds ; heart-healthy fish such as salmon , tuna , and mackerel ; avocado . use oils when cooking food instead of butter , cream , shortening , lard , or stick margarine . what foods and drinks should i limit if i have diabetes ? foods and drinks to limit include fried foods and other foods high in saturated fat and trans fat foods high in salt , also called sodium sweets , such as baked goods , candy , and ice cream beverages with added sugars , such as juice , regular soda , and regular sports or energy drinks drink water instead of sweetened beverages . consider using a sugar substitute in your coffee or tea . if you drink alcohol , drink moderately more than one drink a day if you ’ re a woman or two drinks a day if you ’ re a man . if you use insulin or diabetes medicines that increase the amount of insulin your body makes , alcohol can make your blood glucose level drop too low . this is especially true if you haven ’ t eaten in a while . its best to eat some food when you drink alcohol . choose healthy fats , such as from nuts , seeds , and olive oil . when should i eat if i have diabetes ? some people with diabetes need to eat at about the same time each day , while others can be more flexible with the timing of their meals . depending on your diabetes medicines or type of insulin , you may need to eat the same amount of carbohydrates at the same time each day . if you take mealtime insulin , your eating schedule can be more flexible . if you use certain diabetes medicines or insulin and you skip or delay a meal , your blood glucose level can drop too low . ask your health care team when you should eat and whether you should eat before and after physical activity . how much can i eat if i have diabetes ? eating the right amount of food will also help you manage your blood glucose level and your weight . your health care team can help you figure out how much food and how many calories you should eat each day . look up how many calories are in what you eat and drink at the usda 's food-a-pedia . weight-loss planning : if you are overweight or obese , work with your health care team to create a weight-loss plan . these tools may help : the body weight planner can assist you in tailoring your plans to reach and maintain your goal weight . the super tracker allows you to track your food , physical activity , and weight . to lose weight , you need to eat fewer calories and replace less healthy foods with foods lower in calories , fat , and sugar . if you have diabetes , are overweight or obese , and are planning to have a baby , you should try to lose any excess weight before you become pregnant . learn more about planning for pregnancy if you have diabetes . meal plan methods : two common ways to help you plan how much to eat if you have diabetes are the plate method and carbohydrate counting , also called carb counting . check with your health care team about the method that 's best for you . plate method : the plate method helps you control your portion sizes , and you do n't need to count calories . the plate method shows the amount of each food group you should eat . this method works best for lunch and dinner . use a 9-inch plate , placing non starchy vegetables on half of the plate , a meat or other protein on one-fourth of the plate , and a grain or other starch on the last one-fourth . starches include starchy vegetables such as corn and peas . you may also eat a small bowl of fruit or a piece of fruit , and drink a small glass of milk as included in your meal plan . you can find many different combinations of food and more details about using the plate method from the american diabetes association 's create your plate . your daily eating plan may also include small snacks between meals . portion sizes : you can use everyday objects or your hand to judge the size of a portion . for example , 1 serving of meat or poultry is the palm of your hand or a deck of cards , 1 3-ounce serving of fish is a checkbook , 1 serving of cheese is six dice , 1/2 cup of cooked rice or pasta is a rounded handful or a tennis ball , 1 serving of a pancake or waffle is a dvd , and 2 tablespoons of peanut butter is a ping-pong ball . carbohydrate counting : the plate method shows the amount of each food group you should eat . carbohydrate counting involves keeping track of the amount of carbohydrates you eat and drink each day . because carbohydrates turn into glucose in your body , they affect your blood glucose level more than other foods do . carb counting can help you manage your blood glucose level . if you take insulin , counting carbohydrates can help you know how much insulin to take . the right amount of carbohydrates varies by how you manage your diabetes , including how physically active you are and what medicines you take , if any . your health care team can help you create a personal eating plan based on carbohydrate counting . the amount of carbohydrates in foods is measured in grams . to count carbohydrate grams in what you eat , you 'll need to learn which foods have carbohydrates , read the nutrition facts food label , or learn to estimate the number of grams of carbohydrate in the foods you eat . add the grams of carbohydrate from each food you eat to get your total for each meal and for the day . most carbohydrates come from starches , fruits , milk , and sweets . try to limit carbohydrates with added sugars or those with refined grains , such as white bread and white rice . instead , eat carbohydrates from fruit , vegetables , whole grains , beans , and low-fat or nonfat milk . in addition to using the plate method and carb counting , you may want to visit a registered dietitian ( rd ) for medical nutrition therapy . choose healthy carbohydrates , such as fruit , vegetables , whole grains , beans , and low-fat milk , as part of your diabetes meal plan . what is medical nutrition therapy ? medical nutrition therapy is a service provided by an rd to create personal eating plans based on your needs and likes . for people with diabetes , medical nutrition therapy has been shown to improve diabetes management . medicare pays for medical nutrition therapy for people with diabetes . if you have insurance other than medicare , ask if it covers medical nutrition therapy for diabetes . will supplements and vitamins help my diabetes ? no clear proof exists that taking dietary supplements such as vitamins , minerals , herbs , or spices can help manage diabetes . you may need supplements if you can not get enough vitamins and minerals from foods . talk with your health care provider before you take any dietary supplement since some can cause side effects or affect how your medicines work . why should i be physically active if i have diabetes ? physical activity is an important part of managing your blood glucose level and staying healthy . being active has many health benefits . physical activity lowers blood glucose levels , lowers blood pressure , improves blood flow , burns extra calories so you can keep your weight down if needed , improves your mood , can prevent falls , and improves memory in older adults . it may help you sleep better . if you are overweight , combining physical activity with a reduced-calorie eating plan can lead to even more benefits . in the look ahead : action for health in diabetes study , overweight adults with type 2 diabetes who ate less and moved more had greater long-term health benefits compared to those who did n't make these changes . these benefits included improved cholesterol levels , less sleep apnea , and being able to move around more easily . even small amounts of physical activity can help . experts suggest that you aim for at least 30 minutes of moderate or vigorous physical activity 5 days of the week . moderate activity feels somewhat hard , and vigorous activity is intense and feels hard . if you want to lose weight or maintain weight loss , you may need to do 60 minutes or more of physical activity 5 days of the week . be patient . it may take a few weeks of physical activity before you see changes in your health . how can i be physically active safely if i have diabetes ? be sure to drink water before , during , and after exercise to stay well hydrated . the following are some other tips for safe physical activity when you have diabetes . plan ahead : talk with your health care team before you start a new physical activity routine , especially if you have other health problems . your health care team will tell you a target range for your blood glucose level and suggest how you can be active safely . your health care team also can help you decide the best time of day for you to do physical activity based on your daily schedule , meal plan , and diabetes medicines . if you take insulin , you need to balance the activity that you do with your insulin doses and meals so you do n't get low blood glucose . prevent low blood glucose : because physical activity lowers your blood glucose , you should protect yourself against low blood glucose levels , also called hypoglycemia . you are most likely to have hypoglycemia if you take insulin or certain other diabetes medicines , such as a sulfonylurea . hypoglycemia also can occur after a long intense workout or if you have skipped a meal before being active . hypoglycemia can happen during or up to 24 hours after physical activity . planning is key to preventing hypoglycemia . for instance , if you take insulin , your health care provider might suggest you take less insulin or eat a small snack with carbohydrates before , during , or after physical activity , especially intense activity . you may need to check your blood glucose level before , during , and right after you are physically active . stay safe when blood glucose is high : if you have type 1 diabetes , avoid vigorous physical activity when you have ketones in your blood or urine . ketones are chemicals your body might make when your blood glucose level is too high , a condition called hyperglycemia , and your insulin level is too low . if you are physically active when you have ketones in your blood or urine , your blood glucose level may go even higher . ask your health care team what level of ketones are dangerous for you and how to test for them . ketones are uncommon in people with type 2 diabetes . take care of your feet : people with diabetes may have problems with their feet because of poor blood flow and nerve damage that can result from high blood glucose levels . to help prevent foot problems , you should wear comfortable , supportive shoes and take care of your feet before , during , and after physical activity.what physical activities should i do if i have diabetes ? most kinds of physical activity can help you take care of your diabetes . certain activities may be unsafe for some people , such as those with low vision or nerve damage to their feet . ask your health care team what physical activities are safe for you . many people choose walking with friends or family members for their activity . doing different types of physical activity each week will give you the most health benefits . mixing it up also helps reduce boredom and lower your chance of getting hurt . try these options for physical activity : add extra activity to your daily routine : if you have been inactive or you are trying a new activity , start slowly , with 5 to 10 minutes a day . then add a little more time each week . increase daily activity by spending less time in front of a tv or other screen . try these simple ways to add physical activities in your life each day : walk around while you talk on the phone or during tv commercials . do chores , such as work in the garden , rake leaves , clean the house , or wash the car . park at the far end of the shopping center parking lot and walk to the store . take the stairs instead of the elevator . make your family outings active , such as a family bike ride or a walk in a park . if you are sitting for a long time , such as working at a desk or watching tv , do some light activity for 3 minutes or more every half hour . light activities include leg lifts or extensions , overhead arm stretches , desk chair swivels , torso twists , side lunges , walking in place . do aerobic exercise : aerobic exercise is activity that makes your heart beat faster and makes you breathe harder . you should aim for doing aerobic exercise for 30 minutes a day most days of the week . you do not have to do all the activity at one time . you can split up these minutes into a few times throughout the day . to get the most out of your activity , exercise at a moderate to vigorous level . try walking briskly or hiking , climbing stairs , swimming or a water-aerobics class , dancing , riding a bicycle or a stationary bicycle , taking an exercise class , playing basketball , tennis , or other sports . talk with your health care team about how to warm up and cool down before and after you exercise . do strength training to build muscle : strength training is a light or moderate physical activity that builds muscle and helps keep your bones healthy . strength training is important for both men and women . when you have more muscle and less body fat , you 'll burn more calories . burning more calories can help you lose and keep off extra weight . you can do strength training with hand weights , elastic bands , or weight machines . try to do strength training two to three times a week . start with a light weight . slowly increase the size of your weights as your muscles become stronger . do stretching exercises : stretching exercises are light or moderate physical activity . when you stretch , you increase your flexibility , lower your stress , and help prevent sore muscles . you can choose from many types of stretching exercises . yoga is a type of stretching that focuses on your breathing and helps you relax . even if you have problems moving or balancing , certain types of yoga can help . for instance , chair yoga has stretches you can do when sitting in a chair or holding onto a chair while standing . your health care team can suggest whether yoga is right for you . heart disease & stroke : diabetes can damage blood vessels and lead to heart disease and stroke . you can do a lot to prevent heart disease and stroke by managing your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels ; and by not smoking . low blood glucose ( hypoglycemia ) : hypoglycemia occurs when your blood glucose drops too low . certain diabetes medicines make low blood glucose more likely . you can prevent hypoglycemia by following your meal plan and balancing your physical activity , food , and medicines . testing your blood glucose regularly can also help prevent hypoglycemia . nerve damage ( diabetic neuropathy ) : diabetic neuropathy is nerve damage that can result from diabetes . different types of nerve damage affect different parts of your body . managing your diabetes can help prevent nerve damage that affects your feet and limbs , and organs such as your heart . foot problems : diabetes can cause nerve damage and poor blood flow , which can lead to serious foot problems . common foot problems , such as a callus , can lead to pain or an infection that makes it hard to walk . get a foot checkup at each visit with your health care team . kidney disease : diabetic kidney disease , also called diabetic nephropathy , is kidney disease caused by diabetes . you can help protect your kidneys by managing your diabetes and meeting your blood pressure goals . eye disease : diabetes can damage your eyes and lead to low vision and blindness . the best way to prevent eye disease is to manage your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol ; and to not smoke . also , have a dilated eye exam at least once a year . gum disease & other dental problems : diabetes can lead to problems in your mouth , such as infection , gum disease , or dry mouth . to help keep your mouth healthy , manage your blood glucose , brush your teeth twice a day , see your dentist at least once a year , and do n't smoke . sexual & urologic problems : having diabetes can increase your chance of having bladder problems and changes in sexual function . following your diabetes management plan is important to help prevent or delay sexual and urologic problems . cancer & diabetes : diabetes is linked to some types of cancer . many risk factors for cancer and for diabetes are the same . not smoking and getting recommended cancer screenings can help prevent cancer . dementia & diabetes : high blood glucose increases the chance of developing dementia . tell your doctor if you are forgetful because dementia can make it hard to manage your diabetes . depression & diabetes : depression is common among people with a chronic , or long-term , illness such as diabetes . depression can be treated so tell your doctor if you feel sad , hopeless , or anxious . sleep apnea & diabetes : people who have sleep apnea ( when you stop breathing for short periods during sleep ) are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . sleep apnea also can make diabetes worse . treatment for sleep apnea can help . type 1 diabetes . approximately 1.25 million american children and adults ( 0.4 % ) have type 1 diabetes . predominant onset is in childhood . 45 % of children present before 10 years of age . the body ’ s immune system attacks and destroys the beta cells in the pancreas that produce insulin . patients require lifelong insulin to stay alive . insulin : insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas which sits behind the stomach . insulin is released into the bloodstream where it travels throughout the body to help a sugar called glucose enter into cells to be used as energy . complications of diabetes : high glucose levels damage small and large blood vessels . diabetes is the leading cause of : adult blindness ; kidney failure ; non-traumatic amputations . diabetes increases the risk of heart attacks and strokes 2-4 fold . keeping blood glucose levels close to normal will largely prevent diabetes complications . type 1 diabetes management teach patients to give insulin to blood match the body ’ s needs . insulin injections . insulin pumps . fingerstick glucose measurements 4 or more times a day . adjust insulin dosage based on glucose level . what factors influence how well glucose levels are controlled ? correctly estimating the amount of carbohydrates in the meal . giving insulin 15-20 before meals is best . recent exercise decreases insulin requirements . physical and psychological stress , or inactivity increase insulin requirements . insulin absorption is affected by the dose , depth of injection , skin temperature , injection site , smoking , scar tissue . striving for near-normal glucose levels with insulin increases the risk of low blood glucose levels ( hypoglycemia ) . severe hypoglycemia : a very low glucose reaction that requires assistance from another person occurs in 25 % of intensively controlled patients yearly . symptoms may take hours to fully resolve may lead to seizures . estimated to be the cause of death in 4-6 % of type 1 diabetes patients . people living with type diabetes have to think about their diabetes all day to prevent long term complications and hypoglycemia . fingerstick glucose measurement . insulin injections . insulin pump therapy . what diabetes research provides ? hope . what patients with type diabetes want most ? cure . immunotherapy : prevent the onset or progression of auto-immune destruction of insulin-producing beta cells . block the destructive immune t cells . support regulatory cells which protect against autoimmunity . t effector and regulatory cell interactions determine appropriate immune response balance exists in normal immune response t effector cells kill viruses , bacteria and cancer cells regulatory cells regulate the immune response : balance exists in normal immune system . t effector cells kill viruses , bacteria , and cancer cells . regulatory cells regulate the immune response . misdirected e effector cells otchestrate cell destruction in autoimmune type 1 diabetes . normal proteins on the surface beta cells by a number of mechanisms . regulatory cell inhibition is ineffective . preventive treatments that target t effector cells or the destructive cytokines they release/ azathioprine , mycophenolate mofetil , cyclosporine , anti-cd3 antibodies , teplizumab , otelixizumab , rituximab , interleukin-1 antagonists . effective in mouse model of type 1 diabetes . commonly less effective in humans . at higher doses that lead to better protection . common effects : fever , headache , low blood pressure , rashes . acute mononucleosis-like syndrome . concern over the risk of long term immune suppression : infections ; cancer . preservation of regulatory cells in new-onset type 1 diabetes . regulatory cells . deficient in diabetic nod mice and humans with type 1 diabetes . we have confirmed that regulatory cells are destroyed by a fas-fasl interaction between cells . the normal way that immune cells are down-regulated after increasing in number to fight an infection . this is pathway is turned on to destroy regulatory cells in mice and humans that develop type 1 diabetes . blocking the fas-fasl pathway . through use of a fasl antibody protects regulatory cells from apoptosis ( death ) and prevents type 1 diabetes development in the nod mouse model . current and future studies . making humanized monoclonal fasl antibodies . identify and expand those with potent ability to block the activity of human fasl . plan to test their safety and immune effects in normal subjects . potential future use in type 1 diabetes prevention trials : as sole therapy ; in combination with lower doses of drugs targeted to t effector cells and destructive cytokines the management of type 2 diabetes is multi-faceted . following diagnosis , patients require education to self-manage their condition and make lifestyle changes . glycaemic targets need to be selected that are appropriate for the individual . management should be regularly reviewed with timely offers of treatment intensification , including initiation of insulin . however , good glycaemic control is only one factor that influences outcomes in people with type 2 diabetes . recent evidence has reiterated the benefits of managing cardiovascular risk factors in patients with type 2 diabetes . key practice points : emphasize the importance of lifestyle change as the foundation of all treatments for type 2 diabetes and ensure all patients have access to self-management education . glycaemic targets should be negotiated individually with patients using shared-decision making . management of type 2 diabetes requires regular review and timely intensification of treatment , including insulin initiation if appropriate . isophane is the recommended first-line insulin ; initiation is managed in primary care . glycaemic control should always be managed in parallel with other cardiovascular risk factors . diabetes management essentials : the number of people in new zealand with diabetes is expected to double in the next 20 years , if current trends continue . it is estimated that there are now 242 , 000 people in new zealand with type 1 or type 2 diabetes , and a further 500 , 000 people with pre-diabetes ( hb a1c 41-49 mmol/mol ) . overall , 6 % of the adult population in new zealand has been diagnosed with diabetes including pacific peoples ( 9 % ) , mori ( 7 % ) , asian ( 6 % ) and people aged over 65 years ( > 10 % ) .2 there are also a substantial number of undiagnosed people in new zealand with type 2 diabetes . a sample of over 4700 people found higher rates of undiagnosed diabetes in pacific peoples ( 6.4 % ) , compared with mori ( 2.2 % ) and new zealand european and others ( 1.5 % ) . a focus on mori and pacific peoples : mori and pacific peoples with diabetes are likely to benefit from more intensive management as they often have poor glycaemic control and may develop cardiovascular disease and renal damage more rapidly than new zealand europeans.a review of almost 30 , 000 patients attending annual diabetes checks in new zealand found the average hb a1c was 68.6 mmol/ mol for pacific patients , 64.9 mmol/mol for mori patients and 54.9 mmol/mol for new zealand european patients . information and statistics on diabetes care for individual dhbs is available from the health quality and safety commissions atlas of healthcare variation . management always begins with lifestyle : a healthy lifestyle is the foundation of treatment for all people with type 2 diabetes . weight reduction is effective for reducing blood pressure and improving lipid profile . patients can be encouraged to reduce their intake of saturated fat and trans fats and increase dietary fibre , e.g . whole grains . a reduced portion size at meals may be appropriate for some people . if agreed lifestyle goals are not achieved discussions should be initiated to help overcome barriers to change , regardless of diabetes duration or type of medicine being taken . if a patient has successfully made lifestyle changes but their glycaemic control is inadequate , the possibility of more intensive lifestyle changes may be discussed . patient education is part of diabetes management : often people who have lived with diabetes for many years have a poor understanding of their condition . despite type 2 diabetes being a progressive disease , some people may believe it will eventually “ go away ” . if a patient is able to achieve ongoing glycaemic control below the diagnostic threshold for diabetes they are considered to be in remission , rather than cured . diabetes remission can be achieved with very low-calorie diets diabetes remission is defined as glycaemic control below the diagnostic threshold for type 2 diabetes without the need for pharmacological or ongoing surgical treatment , e.g . repeated replacements of gastrointestinal devices . the term remission acknowledges that people diagnosed with type 2 diabetes who have exceptional glycaemic control remain at risk of relapse due to aberrant physiology and/or genetic predisposition . diabetes remission can be achieved following bariatric surgery or significant weight loss . emerging data shows that people with diabetes who consume very low-calorie diets are able to achieve large reductions in hba1c , body weight and cardiovascular risk , at least in the short term . these diets involve severe calorie restriction , e.g . eating less than 3350 kj ( 800 calories ) per day ; this is difficult to achieve and sustain , and studies have reported drop-out rates as high as one-third . severe restrictions on calorie intake are only appropriate for highly motivated patients who are overweight . it is recommended that input from a dietitian and medical supervision be arranged before patients are initiated on very low calorie diets . to date , studies investigating very low calorie diets have involved relatively small sample sizes and follow-up has been limited , therefore the long-term effectiveness of these diets is unknown . patients who consume very low calorie diets require ongoing maintenance strategies to manage their weight . a systematic review of 17 studies found an average reduction in hba1c of approximately 15 mmol/mol , although variability between studies was high . patients lost an average of 13.2 kg and all studies reported significant reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure and total cholesterol . structured diabetes education is recognised in new zealand as a critical aspect of treatment . the goal is to enable the patient to take an active role in their own care . the cultural needs of the patient and their family/whnau are important when considering education programmes . programmes that deliver education in face-to-face sessions are more likely to be effective , and those that offer 11 hours of contact have been shown to improve glycaemic control . diabetes new zealand has local branches throughout the country that provide a variety of services . glycaemic targets need to be individualized : reducing hyperglycaemia decreases the onset and progression of microvascular complications such as retinopathy , nephropathy and neuropathy.12 an hb a1c target of 50-55 mmol/mol can be explained as the speed-limit for patients , i.e . measurements above this level are increasingly unsafe . however , glycaemic targets need to take into account diabetes duration , the presence of co-morbidities , life expectancy , social circumstances and the personal beliefs and priorities of the patient . this flexible approach acknowledges the importance of quality of life and maintenance of function , rather than focusing purely on glycaemic control . in older people or those living alone , a less intensive target may be appropriate if there is a high risk of hypoglycaemia . intensive blood glucose control can be harmful to older people with co-morbidities . for example , in people with diabetes and an average age over 60 years and concurrent cardiovascular disease or elevated cardiovascular risk , a glycaemic target of < 42 mmol/mol for more than three years was found to increase mortality . conversely , the longer life expectancy of a younger person means a more stringent target may be appropriate due to the increased duration of exposure to hyperglycaemia . glycaemic targets should be periodically reviewed and may need to be adjusted in response to changes in circumstance such as planning a pregnancy or becoming pregnant , a new medical condition or a change in social situation , e.g . living alone . intensifying diabetes treatment with oral medicines : despite receiving treatment , many people with type 2 diabetes spend long periods with poorly controlled blood glucose . regular review is therefore essential for improving glycaemic control in all patients with diabetes . treatment adherence should be assessed in patients who are unable to meet glycaemic targets . treatment intensification is encouraged in patients who are adherent with their medicines , but unable to meet targets . in general , intensification is appropriate if the patients hb a1c levels do not meet , or closely approach , an agreed target within three months . metformin remains the first-line medicine : metformin remains the first-line pharmacological treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes because it is safe , effective , does not cause weight gain and provides patients with additional cardiovascular benefits . there is a low threshold for initiation and metformin should be added at , or soon after , diagnosis for all patients with type 2 diabetes , unless there are . new zealand guidelines recommend trialling lifestyle modification for three months in asymptomatic patients before beginning treatment with metformin . in practice , however , metformin may often be initiated at diagnosis . international guidance increasingly suggests that patients with markedly elevated hb a1c levels at diagnosis , e.g . 75 mmol/mol , should be initiated on multiple anti-diabetic medicines . this approach to treatment may become more common in the future . metformin decreases glucose production by the liver and increases peripheral utilization of glucose . lactic acidosis can be expected to occur in one in every 10 , 000 patients taking metformin ; a similar risk to other oral anti-diabetic medicines . metformin is contraindicated in patients with significant renal impairment . the dose should be reviewed in patients with an e gfr < 45 m l/min/1.73m2 and metformin is generally avoided in patients with an e gfr < 30 m l/min/1.73m2 . patients taking metformin may experience gastrointestinal adverse effects which can be minimised with a low initial dose and slow titration , often to 1.5 2 g daily , in divided doses ; the maximum daily dose is 3 g , in divided doses . in patients with gastrointestinal adverse effects , a low dose of metformin is preferable to withdrawing treatment completely . treatment should be temporarily withdrawn if the patient becomes dehydrated , acutely unwell or displays signs of ketoacidosis . adding a sulfonylurea : a sulfonylurea can be added to metformin for patients who have not reached an agreed hb a1c target with metformin alone . this class of medicine is most effective in people who have had type 2 diabetes for less than five years ; a lack of response may indicate a loss of functional pancreatic beta-cells . sulfonylureas are contraindicated in patients with ketoacidosis or acute porphyria . caution is required if a sulfonylurea is prescribed to an older patient or a patient with reduced renal function , due to the risk of hypoglycaemia . weight-gain is a common adverse effect of treatment with sulfonylureas . there are three sulfonylureas available in new zealand : glipizide , gliclazide and glibenclamide . glipizide and gliclazide are shorter-acting and are the preferred medicines . acarbose is an alternative first-line treatment : acarbose can be used as a first-line treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes where metformin or a sulfonylurea are contraindicated or not tolerated , or as an adjunctive treatment for patients taking metformin , a sulfonylurea or insulin . however , despite being safe , acarbose is not widely used as it is only mildly effective and is associated with significant gastrointestinal adverse effects . acarbose reduces the amount of glucose absorbed in the small intestine by blocking the -glucosidase enzyme , which breaks down complex carbohydrates into glucose . acarbose is contraindicated in patients with inflammatory bowel disease , colonic ulceration , predisposition to , or history of , intestinal obstruction , large hernias or gastrointestinal disorders with malabsorption . it should be avoided in patients with an e gfr < 25 m l/min/1.73m2 or severe hepatic impairment . acarbose tablets should be chewed with the first mouthful of food or swallowed whole with a drink immediately before eating . gastrointestinal adverse effects , e.g . flatulence and diarrhea , are common , especially when sucrose or sucrose- containing foods are consumed . pioglitazone is an alternative to standard treatments : pioglitazone may be appropriate when treatment with metformin and a sulfonylurea is not tolerated or contraindicated , or if an alternative to insulin is required , e.g . the patient would prefer trialling another oral medicine before initiating insulin . pioglitazone may also be used in combination with metformin and a sulfonylurea , or as an adjunctive treatment with metformin in patients who require escalating doses of insulin . pioglitazone , and other thiazolidinediones , bind to nuclear receptors in insulin sensitive tissues leading to a reduction in insulin resistance and improvements in glucose and lipid metabolism . medicines in this class are considered to be insulin sensitizers , like metformin , and do not cause hypoglycaemia . the use of a thiazolidinedione can cause significant weight gain , peripheral oedema and the risk of heart failure is increased . there is also an increased risk of bone fracture , particularly in post-menopausal females taking pioglitazone . despite the adverse effects , pioglitazone may be beneficial in patients for whom there is a limited number of treatment options . if pioglitazone is prescribed in combination with insulin low doses are recommended , with close monitoring for adverse effects . pioglitazone is contraindicated in patients with a history of heart failure , non-investigated macroscopic haematuria or bladder cancer . patients taking a sulfonylurea or insulin may need dose adjustments after beginning treatment with pioglitazone due to an increased risk of hypoglycaemia associated with combination treatment . liver function testing is recommended before beginning treatment and periodically thereafter . advise patients to contact a health professional immediately if they develop symptoms suggestive of liver toxicity , i.e . nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain , fatigue , dark urine or jaundice . pioglitazone and bladder cancer : the controversy and the risk : concerns that pioglitazone use is associated with an increased incidence of bladder cancer were first raised during preclinical trials in the 1990s . a meta-analysis including five randomized controlled trials and observational studies found a modest , but clinically significant , increase in the risk of bladder cancer ; the larger the cumulative dose and the longer the duration of treatment , the greater the risk . in 2011 , the united states food and drug administration ( fda ) announced that labels for pioglitazone-containing medicines must include a warning that use for more than one year may be associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer . in contrast , a more recent study not included in the previous meta-analysis , with at least ten years follow-up , found that in more than 34 , 000 patients , treatment with pioglitazone was not associated with an increased risk of bladder , lung , endometrium , colon , rectum or kidney cancer , non-hodgkins lymphoma or melanoma . the authors did note a 41 % increased risk of pancreatic cancer and a 13 % increased risk of prostate cancer associated with pioglitazone use . however , other anti-diabetic medicines were also associated with an increased risk of pancreatic cancer suggesting reverse causality , i.e . that diabetes may increase the risk of pancreatic cancer . due to the uncertainty surrounding pioglitazone and cancer risk it is helpful to take a pragmatic view . bladder cancer is relatively uncommon and the absolute risk to patients due to pioglitazone exposure is likely to be small . the study that did find an association between pioglitazone treatment and bladder cancer calculated the number needed to harm ( nnh ) for one additional person to develop bladder cancer after more than two years cumulative treatment to be more than 1400. the contraindication of previous or active bladder cancer means that patients at the highest risk will not be exposed to treatment with pioglitazone . newer anti-diabetic medicines that are approved but not subsidized : incretin-modulating medicines act on incretins , which are intestinal hormones that control the post-prandial production of insulin and glucagon . there are three incretin-modulating medicines approved for use , but not subsidized , in new zealand : exenatide is a glp-1 agonist which increases postprandial insulin release and decreases glucagon secretion ; given subcutaneously sitagliptin and saxagliptin are oral dpp-iv inhibitors which block the enzyme which degrades incretins , thereby increasing the levels of endogenous hormones both dpp-iv inhibitors and glp-1 agonists have a marked glucose-lowering effect that reduces post-prandial hyperglycaemia with no additional risk of hypoglycaemia . unlike sulfonylureas and thiazolidinediones , dpp-iv inhibitors do not cause weight gain and patients taking glp-1 agonists can be expected to lose weight . dpp-iv inhibitors and glp-1 agonists are generally well tolerated and have relatively few adverse effects . due to concerns about pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer , the fda and the european medicines agency conducted extensive independent reviews on the safety of medicines which interact with incretins . it was concluded that there was “ no compelling evidence ” of an increased risk of pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer in patients taking incretin-based medicines . however , pancreatitis is still considered to be a risk associated with the use of these medicines until proven otherwise . a recent review of three trials involving dpp-iv inhibitors in treating people with type 2 diabetes concluded that they lowered hba1c by 3.3-8.8 mmol/mol , but did not modify cardiovascular disease or mortality . however , the follow-up periods in these studies ranged from 1.5-3 years which may not have been long enough to detect changes in cardiovascular outcomes . the sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 ( sglt2 ) inhibitors are a new class of glucose lowering medicine . in new zealand , dapagliflozin and canagliflozin are approved for use , but not subsidized . they are indicated as a first-line treatment for patients with type 2 diabetes who can not tolerate metformin , or as an adjunctive treatment with metformin , sulfonylurea and/or insulin . the sglt2 inhibitors have an hba1c lowering effect similar to other oral diabetes medicines . these medicines are generally well tolerated and improve glycaemic control by reducing glucose absorption and increasing urinary glucose excretion by up to 80 g per day . due to their novel mechanism of action , sglt2 inhibitors do not increase the risk of hypoglycaemia and they are effective in people with reduced pancreatic beta-cell function ; although there is an increase in the risk of genital yeast infections , as well as urinary tract infections . clinical trials have found that treatment with sglt2 inhibitors is associated with reductions in hba1c of 5.5-11 mmol/mol , compared with placebo . patients can expect to lose 2 kg over six to 12 months of treatment and reduce systolic blood pressure by 2-4 mmhg and diastolic blood pressure by 1-2 mmhg . a recent study of over 7000 patients found that the addition of a sglt2 inhibitor ( empagliflozin ) to standard care for a median of 2.6 years resulted in significantly lower rates of death from cardiovascular causes , hospitalization due to heart failure and all-cause mortality , compared with the addition of a placebo . this study was discontinued early due to the cardiovascular benefits of treatment with empagliflozin . similar cardiovascular outcomes studies are yet to report their findings , but it appears sglt2 inhibitors will have an increasing role in the treatment of type 2 diabetes in the future . initiating insulin treatment : insulin has a greater blood glucose lowering ability than any other hypoglycaemic medicine and it is eventually required by many people with type 2 diabetes . however , a reluctance to initiate , by both patients and clinicians , often delays treatment . initiation of insulin in primary care should be considered for any patients with hba1c persistently greater than their individualized target ( especially hba1c > 65 mmol/ mol ) , despite optimal oral treatment , particularly if they have signs such as ketonuria and weight loss . following initiation , doses need to be titrated to optimise treatment . selecting an insulin regimen the patient ’ s blood glucose pattern , as determined by self-monitoring , is used to select an insulin treatment regimen . isophane , once daily , at night : this regimen is appropriate for patients with high fasting blood glucose levels in the morning that either decrease or stay constant as the day progresses . a recommended starting dose is 10 units of isophane , before bed . isophane , once daily , before breakfast : this regimen is appropriate for patients with acceptable fasting blood glucose levels in the morning that rise throughout the day . a recommended starting dose is 10 units of isophane , each morning . isophane , twice daily : this regimen may be considered if the patient has high blood glucose levels during the day and at night , or if they are markedly hyperglycaemic . a recommended starting dose is 6-10 units of isophane , morning and night . new zealand guidelines recommend that treatment with a sulfonylurea be withdrawn in patients taking twice daily isophane . however , in practice metformin and sulfonylureas are generally continued throughout treatment with basal insulin , such as isophane . when insulin therapy is intensified to include a short-acting insulin ( e.g . with meals ) sulfonylureas are withdrawn . some international guidance recommends that insulin treatment begin with a long-acting form . in reality there is little difference in efficacy between long and intermediate acting forms of insulin . long-acting forms of insulin , e.g . glargine , may be appropriate if hypoglycaemia is a concern . pre-mixed insulins may be considered for patients who are unable to meet hba1c targets with isophane and have elevated post-prandial blood glucose levels . biphasic insulin lispro and insulin as part pre-mixes are preferred by some clinicians to biphasic isophane pre-mixes due to a reduced risk of hypoglycaemia . the transition from basal insulin to pre-mixed insulin can be managed in primary care , although discussion with a diabetologist or diabetes nurse is recommended for practitioners who are not experienced with the process . managing hypoglycaemia : before insulin is initiated , ensure that patients know the symptoms of hypoglycaemia , e.g . shaking , sweating , blurred vision , light-headedness , loss of concentration . hypoglycaemia usually begins when blood glucose is < 4 mmol/l.26 if symptoms occur , advise the patient to check their blood glucose level ( if possible ) to confirm that this is the cause of their symptoms . patients with hypoglycaemia can be advised to : eat one serving of a quick-acting carbohydrate , e.g . seven to eight jellybeans or three teaspoons of glucose powder dissolved in water check blood glucose level after ten minutes – if it is still < 4 mmol/l , eat another serving of quick-acting carbohydrate . once blood glucose level is > 4 mmol/l , eat a snack such as three or four crackers , or a small tub of low-fat yoghurt , or a meal if it is the appropriate time of day if a patient has recurrent episodes of hypoglycaemia , despite lowering the dose , consider contacting a diabetologist or a diabetes nurse for further management advice . titrating insulin dosing : the initial insulin dose is a starting point . the dose should be titrated until the agreed glycaemic level is reached or hypoglycaemia limits further increases . advise patients to maintain a regular intake of food during this process . three consecutive blood glucose measurements are used to titrate insulin dosing , the timing of which depends on the regimen : once daily , at night – measure blood glucose pre-breakfast ( fasting ) ; once daily , before breakfast – measure blood glucose pre-evening meal ; twice daily – measure blood glucose either pre-breakfast or pre-evening meal . generally the patient ’ s blood glucose levels are reviewed every two to four days , depending on their response . ideally , patients will be able to self-adjust insulin doses and follow-up should be arranged to ensure that this is occurring . contact with the patient in the days immediately following insulin initiation is important to support treatment and improve outcomes . the frequency of self-monitoring of blood glucose can be reduced once the insulin regimen is established . managing risk factors with regular follow-up : people with type 2 diabetes are three times more likely to die of a cardiovascular event compared with the general population . while good glycaemic control improves microvascular outcomes , it does not appear to improve cardiovascular outcomes to the same extent . therefore glycaemic control is part of a wider suite of interventions for patients with type 2 diabetes , including smoking cessation , blood pressure control , lipid management and , if appropriate , antiplatelet treatment . a study found that in patients with type 2 diabetes and microalbuminuria the risk of cardiovascular and microvascular events was reduced by approximately one-half with an intensive management strategy focusing on multiple risk factors , compared to conventional care . the importance of treating hypertension : between 70 % and 80 % of people with type 2 diabetes have hypertension . people with diabetes are particularly susceptible to blood pressure-related complications ; a systolic blood pressure > 120 mmhg in combination with diabetes predicts long-term end-stage kidney disease . controlling blood pressure in patients with diabetes decreases the risk of myocardial infarction , heart failure , stroke and all-cause-mortality , nephropathy and other microvascular complications . recently the benefits of blood pressure control in patients with type 2 diabetes have been quantified . a meta-analysis including more than 100 , 000 people with type 2 diabetes and hypertension , found that each 10 mmhg drop in systolic blood pressure was associated with a significantly lower risk of mortality , cardiovascular events , coronary heart disease and stroke . however , the optimal range when managing blood pressure in people with type 2 diabetes is narrow ; systolic blood pressure < 120 mmhg is associated with an increased risk of hypotension , falls and cardiac dysrhythmias . treating hypertension improves microvascular outcomes : controlling hypertension in people with type 2 diabetes is associated with reduced diabetic retinopathy and albuminuria . a cochrane review found that reducing blood pressure had a protective effect against diabetic retinopathy that lasted for four to five years . however , there was less evidence supporting the use of antihypertensives as a treatment for existing retinopathy . angiotensin converting enzyme ( ace ) inhibitors are firstline : pharmacological treatment is recommended for all patients with type 2 diabetes with a blood pressure consistently > 130/80 mmhg for three months , despite changes in lifestyle . an ace inhibitor is the preferred antihypertensive for patients with type 2 diabetes ; an angiotensin ii receptor blocker ( arb ) is recommended if an ace inhibitor is not tolerated . annual reviews of kidney function : the albumin : creatinine ratio ( acr ) of patients with type 2 diabetes should be measured at least annually and more frequently for māori , pacific and south asian peoples . microalbuminuria is the earliest sign of chronic kidney disease ( ckd ) in people with diabetes and requires prompt treatment . treat albuminuria to reduce cardiovascular risk . preserving renal function is a crucial part of diabetes care . blood living well with diabetes : a strategic plan from the ministry of health : in october , 2015 , the ministry of health released its “ living well with diabetes ” vision . the objective is to ensure that people with diabetes , or at risk of developing type 2 diabetes , are living well and have access to high-quality patient-centred heath services . the plan identifies six priority areas : to ensure health services are based on evidence and to test and evaluate interventions to find out what works best in new zealand . prevention and early intervention , including mental health needs , to reduce the burden of diabetes . reducing disparities in health outcomes due to diabetes . providing patient-centred health services . providing sustainable and consistent health services across new zealand . achieving effective self-management of diabetes , including the provision of technology-enabled tools . within the plan are measures created to track progress in improving health outcomes for people with diabetes against a two-year baseline from 2013 – 2014. pressure control is the cornerstone of treatment for people with reduced renal function . management of cardiovascular risk factors needs to be intensive in patients with type 2mdiabetes and microalbuminuria . the five-year cardiovascular risk of a patient with diabetes and an acr ≥ 30 mg/mmol is assumed to be > 20 % . managing cholesterol in patients with type 2 diabetes : people with type 2 diabetes often have elevated serum triglycerides , decreased hdl cholesterol levels and ldl cholesterol levels that vary from elevated to normal . in patients with type 2 diabetes ldl particles may be more prone to plaque formation . consider initiating a statin for patients with a five-year cardiovascular risk of > 10 % ; the benefits of statin treatment increase as the patient ’ s cardiovascular risk increase . making foot checks a habit : encourage patients with type 2 diabetes to inspect their feet regularly or ask a family member to do so . the patient ’ s feet should be assessed at least once a year , or every three months if they are at high risk of foot complications . risk factors for foot disease in people with diabetes include : presence of callus ; peripheral vascular disease ; peripheral neuropathy ; previous amputation ; previous ulceration ; joint deformity ; visual/mobility problems . retinopathy testing at least every two years : patients with type 2 diabetes require retinal testing at least every two years . testing is performed more frequently if the patient has been diagnosed with retinopathy , depending on the severity . assess mental health and wellbeing : health professionals should be vigilant for mental health problems in patients with type 2 diabetes . depression is reportedly twice as common , compared with people in the between the conditions , i.e . type 2 diabetes increases the risk of depression and depression increases the risk of type 2 diabetes . patients may experience anxiety when they are diagnosed with diabetes or when complications occur . only one-third of patients with type 2 diabetes and a co-existing mental health disorder are reported to receive treatment for this . poor mental health makes it more likely that patients will not adhere to treatment or attend consultations , increasing their risk of diabetes-related complications and reducing quality of life . consider using a depression screening tool such as the patient health questionnaire ( phq ) . over the last two weeks , how often have you been bothered by either of the following problems ? ” : little interest or pleasure in doing things feeling down , depressed , or hopeless not at all = 0 points , several days = 1 point , more than half the days = 2 points , nearly every day = 3 points . a combined score ≥3 across the two questions indicates depression.35 the importance of assessing mental health and wellbeing is highlighted in the recent living well with diabetes strategic plan from the ministry of health . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a condition that causes blood sugar ( blood glucose ) levels to rise higher than normal . hyperglycemia is the term doctors use to describe high blood sugar . when you eat , your body breaks food down into glucose and sends it into the blood . Insulin , a hormone made in your pancreas , helps move the glucose from your blood into your blood cells as fuel for energy . your pancreas is an organ in your abdomen ( stomach ) . there are three types of diabetes : type , type 2 , and gestational diabetes ( diabetes you have when you ’ re pregnant ) . what is type 2 diabetes ? in type 2 diabetes , your body has trouble using the insulin its making . this is called insulin resistance , and it causes your blood sugar to rise higher than normal . first , your pancreas makes more insulin to make up for this . but over time , it isn ’ t able to keep your blood sugar levels in a normal range . when blood sugar levels stay high for extended periods of time , it increases your risk of other medical problems like heart attacks , kidney disease , blindness , and nerve pain . what treatments are used for type 2 diabetes ? the goal of treatment is to help you feel good and prevent long term problems caused by diabetes . to meet these goals , your health care team will collaborate with you to create a care plan that includes lifestyle changes and medications . your care plan will help you reach your treatment goals . the best way to reach these goals is to : have an eating plan that meets your needs and helps you reach your goals . What you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat are all important . stay physically active and get regular exercise . take your medications ( both pills and injected medications ) as prescribed by your doctor . understanding type 2 diabetes needing to take medication , including insulin , to manage your type 2 diabetes does not mean you failed . taking medication is simply part of good diabetes management . The most important thing you can do to stay healthy with diabetes is manage your blood sugar well and that means taking medication on schedule and making healthy lifestyle choices . type 2 diabetes changes over time . first , healthy eating and physical activity may be enough to reach your targets . but most people end up needing medications , including insulin , at some point to manage their blood sugar , no matter how hard they work to reach their targets . what causes type 2 diabetes ? scientists do not know the exact cause of type 2 diabetes . however , developing type 2 diabetes has been linked with several risk factors . these include : how will I know if my diabetes treatment is working ? get an a1c blood test at least two times a year . this helps you and your health care team know how well you are managing your blood sugar levels . The a1c test is part of your abcs of diabetes an easy way to check how well your diabetes treatment is working . the ABCs of diabetes are : ais for a1c or estimated average glucose ( eag ) your a1c test tells you your average blood sugar for the past two to three months . your health care provider may call this your estimated average glucose , also called your eag . the eag shows your a1c results in the same units ( mg/dl ) as the glucose meter you use at home . b Is for blood pressure your blood pressure numbers tell you the force of blood inside your blood vessels . when your blood pressure is high , your heart must work harder . c is for cholesterol . your cholesterol numbers tell you about the amount of fats in your blood . some kinds of cholesterol can raise your risk for heart attack and stroke . a history of hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) , such as prediabetes and/or gestational diabetes are 45 or older are black , hispanic/latino , american indian , asian american , or pacific islander have a parent , brother , or sister with diabetes are overweight are physically inactive have high blood pressure or take medicine for high blood pressure have low hdl cholesterol and/or high triglycerides have been diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome . diabetes mellitus is characterized by abnormally high levels of sugar ( glucose ) in the blood . when the amount of glucose in the blood increases , e.g. , after a meal , it triggers the release of the hormone insulin from the pancreas . insulin stimulates muscle and fat cells to remove glucose from the blood and stimulates the liver to metabolize glucose , causing the blood sugar level to decrease to normal levels . in people with diabetes , blood sugar levels remain high . this may be because insulin is not being produced at all , is not made at sufficient levels , or is not as effective as it should be . the most common forms of diabetes are type 1 diabetes ( 5 % ) , which is an autoimmune disorder , and type 2 diabetes ( 95 % ) , which is associated with obesity . gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that occurs in pregnancy , and other forms of diabetes are very rare and are caused by a single gene mutation . for many years , scientists have been searching for clues in our genetic makeup that may explain why some people are more likely to get diabetes than others are . classification diabetes is classified by underlying cause . the categories are : type 1 diabetes an autoimmune disease in which the body 's own immune system attacks the pancreas , rendering it unable to produce insulin ; type 2 diabetes in which a resistance to the effects of insulin or a defect in insulin secretion may be seen ; gestational diabetes ; and other types . type 2 diabetes commonly occurs in adults who are obese . there are many underlying factors that contribute to the high blood glucose levels in these individuals . an important factor is the body 's resistance to insulin in the body , essentially ignoring its insulin secretions . a second factor is the falling production of insulin by the beta cells of the pancreas . therefore , an individual with type 2 diabetes may have a combination of deficient secretion and deficient action of insulin . in contrast to type 2 , type 1 diabetes most commonly occurs in children and is a result of the body 's immune system attacking and destroying the beta cells . the trigger for this autoimmune attack is not clear , but the result is the end of insulin production . comparison of type 1 and type 2 diabetes . type 1 diabetes type 2 diabetes phenotype onset primarily in childhood and adolescence onset predominantly after 40 years of age thin or normal weight often obese prone to ketoacidosis no ketoacidosis insulin administration required for survival insulin administration not required for survival pancreas is damaged by an autoimmune attack pancreas is not damaged by an autoimmune attack absolute insulin deficiency relative insulin deficiency and/or insulin resistance treatment : insulin injections treatment : ( 1 ) healthy diet and increased exercise ; ( 2 ) hypoglycemic tablets ; ( 3 ) insulin injections genotype increased prevalence in relatives increased prevalence in relatives type 2 diabetes is increasingly diagnosed in younger patients . history of diabetes physicians have observed the effects of diabetes for thousands of years . for much of this time , little was known about this fatal disease that caused wasting away of the body , extreme thirst , and frequent urination . it was n't until 1922 that the first patient was successfully treated with insulin . one of the effects of diabetes is the presence of glucose in the urine ( glucosuria ) . ancient hindu writings , many thousands of years old , document how black ants and flies were attracted to the urine of diabetics . the indian physician sushruta in 400 b.c . described the sweet taste of urine from affected individuals , and for many centuries to come , the sweet taste of urine was key to diagnosis . around 250 b.c. , the name diabetes was first used . it is a greek word that means to syphon , reflecting how diabetes seemed to rapidly drain fluid from the affected individual . the greek physician aretaeus noted that as affected individuals wasted away , they passed increasing amounts of urine as if there was liquefaction of flesh and bones into urine . the complete term diabetes mellitus was coined in 1674 by thomas willis , personal physician to king charles ii . mellitus is latin for honey , which is how willis described the urine of diabetics ( as if imbued with honey and sugar ) . up until the mid-1800s , the treatments offered for diabetes varied tremendously . various fad diets were prescribed , and the use of opium was suggested , as were bleeding and other therapies . the most successful treatments were starvation diets in which calorie intake was severely restricted . naturally , this was intolerable for the patient and at best extended life expectancy for a few years . a breakthrough in the puzzle of diabetes came in 1889. german physicians joseph von mering and oskar minkowski surgically removed the pancreas from dogs . the dogs immediately developed diabetes . now that a link was established between the pancreas gland and diabetes , research focused on isolating the pancreatic extract that could treat diabetes . when dr. frederick banting took up the challenge of isolating a pancreatic extract , he was met with much skepticism . many great physiologists had tried and failed to isolate an internal secretion from the pancreas . but banting , a surgeon , persisted and in may 1921 , he began work in the laboratory of professor john macloed in toronto , canada . charles best , a medical student at the time , worked as his assistant . to concentrate what we now know as insulin , banting tied the pancreatic ducts of dogs . the pancreatic cells that released digestive enzymes ( and could also destroy insulin ) degenerated , but the cells that secreted insulin were spared . over several weeks the pancreas degenerated into a residue from which insulin could be extracted . in july 1921 , a dog that had had its pancreas surgically removed was injected with an extract collected from a duct- tied dog . in the two hours that followed the injection , the blood sugar level of the dog fell , and its condition improved . another de-pancreatized ( diabetic-like ) dog was kept alive for eight days by regular injections until supplies of the extract , at that time called `` isletin '' , were exhausted.2 genetic landscape of diabetes further experiments on dogs showed that extracts from the pancreas caused a drop in blood sugar , caused glucose in the urine to disappear , and produced a marked improvement in clinical condition . so long as the extract was being given , the dogs were kept alive . the supply of the extract was improved : the pancreas of different animals were used until that of the cow was settled upon . this extract kept a de-pancreatized dog alive for days . dr. j. collip , a biochemist , was drafted to continue improving the purity of the pancreas extract , and later , best carried on this work . a young boy , leonard thompson , was the first patient to receive insulin treatment . on january 11 , 1922 , aged 14 and weighing only 64 pounds , he was extremely ill. the first injections of insulin only produced a slight lowering of blood sugar level . the extract still was not pure enough , and abscesses developed at the injection site . collip continued to refine the extract . several weeks later , leonard was treated again and showed a remarkable recovery . his blood sugar levels fell , he gained weight and lived for another 13 years . he died from pneumonia at the age of 27. during the spring of 1922 , best increased the production of insulin to enable the treatment of diabetic patients coming to the toronto clinic . over the next 60 years , insulin was further refined and purified , and long-acting and intermediate types were developed to provide more flexibility . a revolution came with the production of recombinant human dna insulin in 1978. instead of collecting insulin from animals , new human insulin could be synthesized . in 1923 , banting and macloed were awarded the nobel prize for the discovery of insulin . banting split his prize with best , and macloed split his prize with collip . in his nobel lecture , banting concluded the following about their discovery : insulin is not a cure for diabetes ; it is a treatment . it enables the diabetic to burn sufficient carbohydrates , so that proteins and fats may be added to the diet in sufficient quantities to provide energy for the economic burdens of life . epidemiology box 1. increase of diabetes in adults in the united states . about 5 million do not know they have the disease ( 1 ) . type 1 diabetes accounts for 5-10 % of cases , affecting 1 of 400 children and adolescents . type 2 diabetes is extremely common , accounting for 90-95 % of all cases of diabetes . this form of diabetes can go undiagnosed for many years , but the number of cases that are being diagnosed is rising rapidly , leading to reports of a diabetes epidemic . the type 2 diabetes epidemic when people think of epidemics , they often think of infectious diseases such as sars , hiv , or the flu . however , the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is now at epidemic proportions . in the united states , diabetes accounts for over 130 billion dollars of health care costs and is the fifth leading cause of death ( 2 ) . the number of new cases being diagnosed continues to rise . it has been estimated that of the children born in the year 2000 , 1 of 3 will suffer from diabetes at some point in their lifetime ( 3 ) . diabetes is predicted to become one of the most common diseases in the world within a couple of decades , affecting at least half a billion people ( 4 ) . estimate your risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the past , type 2 was rarely seen in the young , hence its original name of adult-onset diabetes . but now type 2 diabetes is increasingly being diagnosed in young adults and even in children . in japan , more children suffer from type 2 than type 1 ( juvenile onset ) diabetes . this young generation of diabetics will have many decades in which to develop the complications of diabetes . in 1990 , 4.9 % of the american population were diagnosed with diabetes . this increased to 7.9 % by the year 2001 ( 5 ) . obesity the driving force behind the high prevalence of diabetes is the rise of obesity in the population . in today 's society , it can be difficult to maintain a healthy weight . we have the combination of ample food and a sedentary lifestyle . this is in stark contrast to only a couple of hundred years ago , when people were more active and food supplies were not as abundant . as a result , many of us are heavier than we should be . calculate your ideal weight4 genetic landscape of diabetes being overweight or obese is defined by a calculation called the body mass index ( bmi ) . it is a calculation that takes your height and weight into consideration and gives you a score . a score of .9 is a healthy weight . if you are overweight , your score lies within the range to 2529.9 ; a score of 30 and above indicates obesity . calculate your bmi in 1991 , it was estimated that 12 % of the population were obese ( 5 ) . by the year 2001 , this had increased to an estimated 20.9 % of the population ; this represents over 44 million obese adult americans . amore recent study estimated that a record 30 % of the american population are now obese ( 6 ) obesity is a major problem for the united states . every year , an estimated 300,000 us adults die of causes related to obesity ( 7 ) . obesity is also a huge economic burden , accounting for up to 4 % of healthcare costs in the united states ( 8 ) . thrifty genes epidemics of infectious diseases increase when there is increased spread of the infectious agent and decrease when the number of victims who are susceptible falls ( they either become immune or they die ) . an epidemic of a genetic disease such as type 2 diabetes is similar . the number of cases rises when there is a rise in environmental risk ( abundant food supplies , lack of activity ) and decreases when the number of susceptible individuals falls ( by deaths from the complications of diabetes ) . the classic example of an epidemic of diabetes is found on an remote island in the pacific ocean , the island of nauru . before the turn of the 20th century , the lifestyle of nauruans was harsh . the soil was poor , agriculture was difficult , and frequent episodes of starvation were common . despite these adverse conditions , the islanders were noted to be heavy . in 1922 , it was discovered that nauru contained phosphate rock , which was then mined for use in fertilizer , and for which the islanders received royalties . over several decades , the nauruans became extremely wealthy , and with their new-found riches came major lifestyle changes . food was now abundant and could be bought from stores . instead of fishing and farming , nauruans now led sedentary lives . by the 1950s , type 2 diabetes exploded from being non-existent in this population to affecting 2 of 3 adults over the age of 55 and becoming a common cause of death . the case of the nauruans is an extreme case of how type 2 diabetes can rapidly reach epidemic proportions , and thrifty genes may be involved . it has been postulated by neel ( 9 ) that genes that are metabolically thrifty give a survival advantage in times when there is a constant threat of famine and starvation . when food is abundant , these genes aid the efficient metabolism of the food , enabling rapid build up of fat stores . this enabled people like the nauruans to survive food shortages later on . but when food is always abundant , a thrifty genetic makeup turns into a survival disadvantage . thrifty genes cause obesity , which in turn predisposes to diabetes . the epidemic that took hold of the island of nauru is now emerging in developing countries and already has a firm hold on the developed world . physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation overview of glucose metabolism glucose is an essential fuel for the body ( figure 1 ) . the amount of glucose in the bloodstream is regulated by many hormones , the most important being insulin . insulin is the hormone of plentyit is released when glucose is abundant and stimulates the following : muscle and fat cells to remove glucose from the blood cells to breakdown glucose , releasing its energy in the form of atp ( via glycolysis and the citric acid cycle ) the liver and muscle to store glucose as glycogen ( short-term energy reserve ) adipose tissue to store glucose as fat ( long-term energy reserve ) cells to use glucose in protein synthesis glucagon is the main hormone opposing the action of insulin and is released when food is scarce . whereas insulin triggers the formation of glycogen ( an energy-requiring process , or an anabolic effect ) , glucagon triggers glycogen breakdown , which releases energy ( a catabolic effect ) . glucagon also helps the body to switch to using resources other than glucose , such as fat and protein ( figure 2 ) . regulation of blood glucose blood glucose levels are not constant they rise and fall depending on the body 's needs , regulated by hormones . this results in glucose levels normally ranging from 70 to 110 mg/dl . the blood glucose level can rise for three reasons : diet , breakdown of glycogen , or through hepatic synthesis of glucose . eating produces a rise in blood glucose , the extent of which depends on a number of factors such as the amount and the type of carbohydrate eaten ( i.e. , the glycemic index ) , the rate of digestion , and the rate of absorption . because glucose is a polar molecule , its absorption across the hydrophobic gut wall requires specialized glucose transporters ( gluts ) of which there are five types . in the gut , glut2 and glut5 are the most common . the liver is a major producer of glucose it releases glucose from the breakdown of glycogen and also makes glucose from intermediates of carbohydrate , protein , and fat metabolism . the liver is also a major consumer of glucose and can buffer glucose levels . it receives glucose-rich blood directly from the digestive tract via the portal vein ( figure 3 ) . the liver quickly removes large amounts of glucose from the circulation so that even after a meal , the blood glucose levels rarely rise above 110 mg/dl in a non-diabetic.6 genetic landscape of diabetes figure . overview of glucose metabolism . glucose is used for many purposes in the body . it can be converted into energy via pyruvate and the tricarboxylic acid ( tca ) cycle , as well as being converted to fat ( long-term storage ) and glycogen ( short-term storage ) . some amino acids may also be synthesized directly from pyruvate ; thus , glucose may also indirectly contribute to protein synthesis . figure 2. anabolism and catabolism of glucose . glucose metabolism involves both energy-producing ( catabolic , shown in orange ) and energy-consuming ( anabolic , shown in green ) processes . introduction to diabetes 7 box . the liver buffers glucose levels . the liver receives glucose-rich blood from the digestive tract via the portal vein ( figure 3 ) . the liver has a high amount of glut2 transporters that do not need the presence of insulin to transport glucose into the liver cells . glut2 has a low affinity for glucose which enables a rapid influx of glucose when sugar levels are high . therefore , in the liver , levels of glucose inside and outside the cell can become equal ( an equilibrium is reached ) . the first step for trapping glucose inside the cell involves phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate ( g6 p ) . the liver differs from the rest of the body in that it uses the enzyme glucokinase , rather than hexokinase . glucokinase can produce g6 pat a faster rate and also is not inhibited by its product ( this is because in the liver , g6 pcan be channeled into making glycogen ) . glucose and insulin both modulate metabolic enzymes in such a way that glycogen formation is promoted . this drives forward the process of bringing more glucose into the liver . insulin promotes glycogen synthesis by stimulating glycogen synthetase and inhibiting glycogen phosphorylase . after a mealthe role of insulin the rise in blood glucose following a meal is detected by the pancreatic beta cells , which respond by releasing insulin . insulin increases the uptake and use of glucose by tissues such as skeletal muscle and fat cells . this rise in glucose also inhibits the release of glucagon , inhibiting the production of glucose from other sources , e.g. , glycogen break down ( figure 4 ) . 1. use glucose once inside the cell , some of the glucose is used immediately via glycolysis . this is a central pathway of carbohydrate metabolism because it occurs in all cells in the body , and because all sugars can be converted into glucose and enter this pathway . during the well-fed state , the high levels of insulin and low levels of glucagon figure 3. the portal circulation . the portal vein drains almost all of the blood from the digestive tract and empties directly into the liver . this circulation of nutrient- rich blood between the gut and liver is called the portal circulation . it enables the liver to remove any harmful substances that may have been digested before the blood enters the main blood circulation around the body the systemic circulation . genetic landscape of diabetes stimulate glycolysis , which releases energy and produces carbohydrate intermediates that can be used in other metabolic pathways . glycolysis in stryer 's biochemistry . make glycogen any glucose that is not used immediately is taken up by the liver and muscle where it can be converted into glycogen ( glycogenesis ) . insulin stimulates glycogenesis in the liver by : stimulating hepatic glycogen synthetase ( the enzyme that catalyzes glycogen synthesis in the liver ) inhibiting hepatic glycogen phosphorylase ( the enzyme that catalyzes glycogen breakdown in the liver ) inhibiting glucose synthesis from other sources ( inhibits gluconeogenesis ) insulin also encourages glycogen formation in muscle , but by a different method . here it increases the number of glucose transporters ( glut4 ) on the cell surface . this leads to a rapid uptake of glucose that is converted into muscle glycogen . changes in key hormones after a meal . changes in blood levels of glucose , insulin , and glucagon after a carbohyrate-rich meal ( ingested at time 0 minutes ) . glycogen metabolism in stryer 's biochemistry . make fat when glycogen stores are fully replenished , excess glucose is converted into fat in a process called lipogenesis . glucose is converted into fatty acids that are stored as triglycerides ( three fatty acid molecules attached to one glycerol molecule ) for storage . insulin promotes lipogenesis by : increasing the number of glucose transporters ( glut4 ) expressed on the surface of the fat cell , causing a rapid uptake of glucose increasing lipoprotein lipase activity , which frees up more fatty acids for triglyceride synthesis in addition to promoting fat synthesis , insulin also inhibits fat breakdown by inhibiting hormone-sensitive lipase ( an enzyme that breaks down fat stores ) . as a result , there are lower levels of fatty acids in the blood stream . fatty acid metabolism in stryer 's biochemistry insulin also has an anabolic effect on protein metabolism . it stimulates the entry of amino acids into cells and stimulates protein production from amino acids . fasting the role of glucagon fasting is defined as more than eight hours without food . the resulting fall in blood sugar levels inhibits insulin secretion and stimulates glucagon release . glucagon opposes many actions of insulin . most importantly , glucagon raises blood sugar levels by stimulating the mobilization of glycogen stores in the liver , providing a rapid burst of glucose . in 1018 hours , the glycogen stores are depleted , and if fasting continues , glucagon continues to stimulate glucose production by favoring the hepatic uptake of amino acids , the carbon skeletons of which are used to make glucose . in addition to low blood glucose levels , many other stimuli stimulate glucagon release including eating a protein- rich meal ( the presence of amino acids in the stomach stimulates the release of both insulin and glucagon , glucagon prevents hypoglycemia that could result from unopposed insulin ) and stress ( the body anticipates an increased glucose demand in times of stress ) . starvation the metabolic state of starvation in the us a is more commonly found in people trying to lose weight rapidly or in those who are too unwell to eat . after a couple of days without food , the liver will have exhausted its stores of glycogen but continues to make glucose from protein ( amino acids ) and fat ( glycerol ) . the metabolism of fatty acids ( from adipose tissue ) is a major source of energy for organs such as the liver . fatty acids are broken down to acetyl-co a , which is channeled into the citric acid cycle and generates atp . as starvation continues , the levels of acetyl-co a increase until the oxidative capacity of the citric acid cycle is exceeded . the liver processes these excess fatty acids into ketone bodies ( 3-hydroxybutyrate ) to be used by many tissues as an energy source . the most important organ that relies on ketone production is the brain because it is unable to metabolize fatty acids . during the first few days of starvation , the brain uses glucose as a fuel . if starvation continues for more than two weeks , the level of circulating ketone bodies is high enough to be used by the brain . this slows down the need for glucose production from amino acid skeletons , thus slowing down the loss of essential proteins . diabetes is often referred to as starvation in the midst of plenty because the intracellular levels of glucose are low , although the extracellular levels may be extremely high . as in starvation , type diabetics use non-glucose sources of energy , such as fatty acids and ketone bodies , in their peripheral tissues . but in contrast to the starvation state , the production of ketone bodies can spiral out of control . because the ketones are weak acids , they acidify the blood . the result is the metabolic state of diabetic ketoacidosis ( dka ) . hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis are the hallmark of type 1 diabetes ( figure 5 ) . hypertriglyceridemia is also seen in dka . the liver combines triglycerol with protein to form very low density lipoprotein ( vldl ) . it then releases vld linto the blood . in diabetics , the enzyme that normally degrades lipoproteins ( lipoprotein lipase ) is inhibited by the low level of insulin and the high level of glucagon . as a result , the levels of vldl and chylomicrons ( made from lipid from the diet ) are high in dka . low-carbohydrate diet low-carbohydrate diets , such as the atkins and south beach diets , are currently popular ways to lose weight . such diet plans involve restricting the type and amount of carbohydrate eaten . one of the earliest descriptions of a low-carbohydrate diet was by william banting in the 1860s in england . at the age of 66 , banting found success in following a carbohydrate-restricted diet : in the course of one year , he lost 46 pounds of his initial weight of 202 pounds . his impression was that any starchy or saccharine matter tends to the disease of corpulence in advanced life . he claimed he was never hungry and that the great charms and comfort of the system are that its effects are palpable within a week of trial and creates a natural stimulus to persevere for a few weeks more . in a recent small trial , 63 obese men and women were assigned to either a low-carbohydrate diet or a low-fat diet ( 1 ) . people on both diets lost weight . the carbohydrate-restricted group initially lost weight at a faster rate , but when reviewed at the end of the year there was no significant difference in weight loss between the two groups ( 1 ) . it was found that low-carbohydrate dieters ( who were allowed unrestricted amounts of protein and fat ) actually had a lower energy intake than the low-fat diets ( who were limited in their calorie intake ) . it may be that when carbohydrates are restricted , weight loss is due to a lower calorie intake due to the monotony of the diet . it is also possible that the lower calorie intake may be because of a change in peripheral or central satiety signals , leaving people feeling more full after a meal . a second study compared the effects of a carbohydrate-restricted diet on the risk of developing atherosclerosis ( 2 ) . 132 severely obese men and women were assigned to either a low-carbohydrate or low-fat diet . again , after a 6-month period both groups lost weight . they became more sensitive to insulin , and their triglyceride ( tg ) levels , a type of fat that is a risk factor for atherosclerosis , improved . however , the carbohydrate-restricted group lost more weight and showed a greater improvement in insulin sensitivity and tg levels . after one year , the weight loss between the two groups was similar , but the cardiogenic risk factors were improved in the low- carbohydrate dieters , tg levels were lower , and levels of hdl cholesterol , a type of fat that protects against atherosclerosis , were higher ( 3 ) . also , long-term sugar control , which can be measured by checking for the amount of glycosylated hemoglobin ( hb a1c ) , was better in people on the low-carbohydrate diet . however , it remains unclear whether these beneficial effects would continue after 1 year . at present , the risks of obesity are well known , and the benefits of weight loss by traditional low-calorie , low-fat , and high-complex carbohydrate diets are also well documented . future research will clarify the long-term outcomes of a low-carbohydrate diet for achieving and maintaining a healthy weight together with the effects on the heart and other systems of the body . insulin synthesis the insulin-making cells of the body are called beta cells , and they are found in the pancreas gland . these cells clump together to form the `` islets of langerhans '' , named for the german medical student who described them . the synthesis of insulin begins at the translation of the insulin gene , which resides on chromosome 11. during translation , two introns are spliced out of the m rna product , which encodes a protein of 110 amino acids in length . this primary translation product is called preproinsulin and is inactive . it contains a signal peptide of 24 amino acids in length , which is required for the protein to cross the cell membrane . once the preproinsulin reaches the endoplasmic reticulum , a protease cleaves off the signal peptide to create proinsulin . proinsulin consists of three domains : an amino-terminal b chain , a carboxyl-terminal a chain , and a connecting peptide in the middle known as the c-peptide . metabolic changes in diabetic ketoacidosis . hyperglycemia is caused by the increased production of glucose by the liver ( driven by glucagon ) and the decreased use of glucose of insulin by peripheral tissues ( because of the lack of insulin ) . proinsulin is exposed to several specific peptidases that remove the c- peptide and generate the mature and active form of insulin . in the golgi apparatus , insulin and free c-peptide are packaged into secretory granules , which accumulate in the cytoplasm of the beta cells . exocytosis of the granules is triggered by the entry of glucose into the beta cells . the secretion of insulin has a broad impact on metabolism . insulin structure in , frederick sanger was awarded his first nobel prize for determining the sequence of the amino acids that make up insulin . this marked the first time that a protein had had the order of its amino acids ( the primary sequence ) determined . insulin is composed of two chains of amino acids named chain a ( 21 amino acids ) and chain b ( 30 amino acids ) that are linked together by two disulfide bridges . there is a 3rd disulfide bridge within the a chain that links the 6th and 11th residues of the a chain together . in most species , the length and amino acid compositions of chains a and bare similar , and the positions of the three disulfide bonds are highly conserved . for this reason , pig insulin can be used to replace deficient human insulin levels in diabetes patients . today , porcine insulin has largely been replaced by the mass production of human proinsulin by bacteria ( recombinant insulin ) . insulin molecules have a tendency to form dimers in solution , and in the presence of zinc ions , insulin dimers associate into hexamers . whereas monomers of insulin readily diffuse through the blood and have a rapid effect , hexamers diffuse slowly and have a delayed onset of action . in the design of recombinant insulin , the structure of insulin can be modified in a way that reduces the tendency of the insulin molecule to form dimers and hexamers but that does not interrupt binding to the insulin receptor . in this way , a range of preparations of insulin is made , varying from short acting to long acting . insulin secretion rising levels of glucose inside the pancreatic beta cells trigger the release of insulin . glucose is transported into the beta cell by type 2 glucose transporters ( glut2 ) . once inside , the first step in glucose metabolism is the phosphorylation of glucose to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this step is catalyzed by glucokinase it is the rate-limiting step in glycolysis , and it effectively traps glucose inside the cell . 2.as glucose metabolism proceeds , atp is produced in the mitochondria . 3.the increase in the atp : adp ratio closes atp-gated potassium channels in the beta cell membrane . positively charged potassium ions ( k+ ) are now prevented from leaving the beta cell . 4.the rise in positive charge inside the beta cell causes depolarization . 5.voltage-gated calcium channels open , allowing calcium ions ( ca2+ ) to flood into the cell . 6.the increase in intracellular calcium concentration triggers the secretion of insulin via exocytosis . there are two phases of insulin release in response to a rise in glucose . the first is an immediate release of insulin . this is attributable to the release of preformed insulin , which is stored in secretory granules . after a short delay , there is a second , more prolonged release of newly synthesized insulin . once released , insulin is active for a only a brief time before it is degraded by enzymes . Insulinase found in the liver and kidneys breaks down insulin circulating in the plasma , and as a result , insulin has a half-life of only about 6 minutes . this short duration of action allows rapid changes in the circulating levels of insulin . insulin receptor the net effect of insulin binding is to trigger a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions . these actions are terminated by dephosphorylation of the insulin receptor . similar to the receptors for other polypeptide hormones , the receptor for insulin is embedded in the plasma membrane and is composed of a pair of alpha subunits and a pair of beta subunits . the alpha subunits are extracellular and contain the insulin-binding site . the beta subunits span the membrane and contain the enzyme tyrosine kinase . kinases are a group of enzymes that phosphorylate proteins ( the reverse reaction is catalyzed by a group of enzymes called phosphatases ) . insulin binding to the alpha subunits induces a conformational change that is transmitted to the beta subunits and causes them to phosphorylate themselves ( autophosphorylation ) . a specific tyrosine of each beta subunit is phosphorylated along with other target proteins , such as insulin receptor substrate ( irs ) . as these and other proteins inside the cell are phosphorylated , this in turn alters their activity , bringing about the wide biological effects of insulin . insulin action the binding of insulin results in a wide range of actions that take place over different periods of time . almost immediately , insulin promotes the uptake of glucose into many tissues that express glut4 glucose transporters , such as skeletal muscle and fat . insulin increases the activity of these transporters and increases their numbers by stimulating their recruitment from an intracellular pool to the cell surface . not all tissues require insulin for glucose uptake . tissues such as liver cells , red blood cells , the gut mucosa , the kidneys , and cells of the nervous system use a glucose transporter that is not insulin dependent . over minutes to hours , insulin alters the activity of various enzymes as a result of changes in their phosphorylation status . over a period of days , insulin increases the amounts of many metabolic enzymes . these reflect an increase in gene transcription , m rna , and enzyme synthesis . the insulin receptor . the insulin receptor is a tyrosine kinase receptor and is composed of a pair of alpha subunits and a pair of beta subunits . insulin binds to the alpha subunits and induces a conformational change that is transmitted to the beta subunits that autophosphorylate and initiate a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions . type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disorder in which the body attacks its pancreatic beta cells . the onset of type 1 diabetes is attributed to both an inherited risk and external triggers , such as diet or an infection . the hunt for these genetic and enviromental risk factors is on-going . about 18 regions of the genome have been linked with influencing type 1 diabetes risk . these regions , each of which may contain several genes , have been labeled iddm1 to iddm18 . the most well studied is iddm1 , which contains the hla genes that encode immune response proteins . variations in hla genes are an important genetic risk factor , but they alone do not account for the disease and other genes are involved . there are two other non-hla genes which have been identified thus far . one of these non-hla genes , iddm2 , is the insulin gene , and the other non-hla gene maps close to ctla4 , which has a regulatory role in the immune response . iddm1 contains the hla genes summary hla genes encode molecules that are crucial to the immune system . these molecules hold small chains of amino acids on the cell surface so that immune cells can analyze these chains . when the immune cells find an inappropriate chain , they begin attacking . without hla genes , immune cells would not find the chains of viruses , bacteria , or tumor cells . on the other hand , inheriting certain versions ( alleles ) of the hla genes increases the probability that immune cells will attack the body 's healthy cells . this is how iddm1 contributes to the immune attack of the beta cells and thus type 1 diabetes . background the hla region is a cluster of genes on chromosome 6. the genes encode glycoproteins that are found on the surfaces of most cells and help the immune system to distinguish between self ( its own cells , e.g. , beta cells of the pancreas ) and non-self ( e.g. , bacteria , viruses ) . autoimmune disease results when the immune system launches an attack against the body 's tissues . the risk of developing autoimmune disease is sometimes related to the alleles of hla genes in the body . type 1 diabetes is unique among these diseases in that hla alleles may increase the risk of diabetes , have no effect , or even be protective . the hla genes encode proteins called major histocompatibility complex ( mhc ) , and there are two main classes of mhc proteins , both of which display chains of amino acids . the chains are called antigens , and immune cells ( called tcells ) analyze them . mhc present chains from inside cells , whereas mhc present chains from outside the cells . if tcells bind to the chain presented on an mhc , the tcell immediately orchestrates powerful attacks by the body 's other immune cells . ideally , the body only contains tcells that bind to chains from infectious organisms ( viruses , bacteria , etc . ) and tumor cells . healthy development largely achieves this ideal . the alternative is found in autoimmune diseases such as diabetes : tcells bind to chains from the body 's healthy cells . there are many different alleles of the hla genes , leading to many different variants of mhc proteins and allowing a variety of chains to be presented to cells . the inheritance of particular hla alleles can account for 17 over half of the genetic risk of developing type diabetes ( 1 ) . the genes encoding mhc proteins are most strongly linked with diabetes , and these genes are called hla-dr , hla-dq , and hla-dp . in the general population , only half of the people inherit a copy ( allele ) of dr gene called dr3 and dr4 , and less than 3 % of the people have two alleles . however , in type 1 diabetes at least one allele of dr3 or dr4 is found in 95 % of caucasians , and individuals with both dr3 and dr4 are particularly susceptible to type 1 diabetes ( 2 ) . conversely , the dr2 allele is protective ( 3 ) . similar to the dr gene , certain alleles of the dq gene are risk factors for developing the disease , whereas other alleles of dq are protective . there is also a tendency for people who inherit dr3 or dr4 to inherit dq , which adds to their genetic risk of developing diabetes . conversely , the protective alleles of dr and dq tend to be inherited together . these tendencies have complicated the study of the effects of individual hla-dr or hla-dq genes . iddm1 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on iddm1 and diabetes , search pub med . associations between hlaalleles and diabetes began to be documented in the 1970s when serological markers were used . this association was later confirmed with genome-wide scans . the iddm1 locus contains many diabetes susceptibility genes , and it remains difficult to identify the specific risk alleles because of linkage disequilibrium ; certain alleles tend to be co-inherited with other alleles , making it difficult to distinguish between the effects of either on diabetes susceptibility . fine mapping of these regions suggests that the two alleles dqb1 and drb1 are the most important ( 4 ) . alleles in the dqb1 gene are often tightly associated with alleles in the drb1 gene , and variants of both or either allele may confer an increased risk of diabetes . sequences in the dqb1 gene that code for an amino acid other than aspartic acid at position 57 ( non-asp57 ) are highly associated with type 1 diabetes ( 5 ) . crystal structures suggest that loss of aspartic acid at this position creates an `` oxyanion hole '' . this may be occupied by the tcell during the interaction between hla and the t- cell receptor ( 6 ) . the diabetes risk of non-asp57 is further increased when the haplotype also contains the drb1 * 0401 allele , suggesting the possible existence of at least two separate loci of susceptibility ( 7 ) . one of the protective hla haplotypes is dqa1 * 0102 , dqb1 * 0602. approximately 20 % of americans and europeans have this haplotype , whereas less than 1 % of children with type 1 diabetes do ( 8 ) . A well-known marker for type 1 diabetes is the presence of islet cell autoantibodies . however , even in the presence of islet cell autoantibodies , the haplotype dq a1 * 0102 , dq b1 * 0602 has a protective effect . but once the diabetes disease process begins , the mechanism that protected these individuals from diabetes is lost , suggesting that inheriting these alleles does not prevent diabetes but may somehow delay or arrest the progression of the disease ( 9 ) . insulin is a hormone that has a wide range of effects on metabolism . its overall action is to encourage the body to store energy rather than use it , e.g. , insulin favors the storage of glucose as glycogen or fat as opposed to breaking down glucose to release atp . for a summary of the actions of insulin , see the physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation genetic factors in type 1 diabetes . insulin is composed of two distinct polypeptide chains , chain a and chain b , which are linked by disulfide bonds . many proteins that contain subunits , such as hemoglobin , are the products of several genes . however , insulin is the product of one gene , ins . Ins actually encodes an inactive precursor called preproinsulin . preproinsulin is processed into proinsulin by removal of a signaling peptide ; however , proinsulin is also inactive . the final processing step involves removal of a c-peptide ( a connecting peptide that links chain a to chain b ) , and this process produces the mature and active form of insulin . molecular information several species , including the rat , mouse , and some species of fish , have two insulin genes . in contrast , in humans there is a single insulin gene that is located on chromosome . it has three exons ( coding regions ) that span about 2,200 bases . exon 2 encodes the b chain , along with the signal peptide and part of the c-peptide found in the precursors of insulin . exon 3 encodes the a chain and the remainder of the c-peptide . c-peptide is secreted in equal amounts to insulin , but it has long been thought that it has no biological role . however , in diabetic rats c-peptide has been shown to reduce the dysfunction of blood vessels and the nervous system that is common in diabetes ( 1 ) . c-peptide contains the greatest variation among species , whereas regions of insulin that bind to the insulin receptor are highly conserved . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the ins gene , none ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein ( see the allelic variants that are known to be associated with disease ) . a blast search using human proinsulin precursor as a query finds proteins in 107 different species , which are all metazoans apart from three plants and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . short alleles are associated with a higher risk of developing type 1 diabetes , whereas the longer class alleles are protective . the presence of at least one class allele is associated with a 3-fold reduction in the risk of type 1 diabetes . immature tcells are presented with chains of amino acids , such as insulin , and tcells that form a response to them ( and thus are autoreactive ) are deleted . because the longer vntrs cause more insulin to be produced in the thymus , the detection and deletion of autoreactive tcells may be more efficient . this improved immune tolerance to insulin would lessen the risk of a future onset of type 1 diabetes caused by anti-insulin antibodies . link roundup for iddm2 live searches diabetes and insulin in pub med pub med central books background information insulin in omimmolecular biology iddm2 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer insulin domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene . location of ins on the human genome . Ins maps to chromosome 11 , approximately between 2144 and 2148 kilobases ( kb ) . click on the figure or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ins in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of ins may fluctuate ; therefore , the live web site may not appear exactly . the remaining type 1 diabetes susceptibility loci , iddm3 iddm18 , were mainly discovered by genome scan linkage studies , e.g. , looking for linkage between regions of the genome and disease in affected sib-pairs . the iddm loci are found on several different chromosomes and contain many genes , many of which have now been identified . some of these genes are suspected to play a role in susceptibility to type 1 diabetes , and they are discussed below . iddm3 no diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm3 locus , which is found on chromosome . iddm4 several potential candidate genes lie near the iddm4 locus on chromosome 11. these include zfm1 ( zinc finger protein 162 ) , which encodes a transcription factor found in the pancreas , and fadd ( fas-associated death protein ) . the transmission of the `` cell death '' signal involves the interaction between fas and fadd , and in type 1 diabetes , the apoptosis of pancreatic beta cells may involve the fadd . apoptosis of the beta cell may be triggered by the binding of fas ( expressed on the beta cell ) with fas ligand ( expressed on the cytotoxic tcell ) ( 1 ) . other candidate genes in this region include lrp5 , which encodes a novel transmembrane protein that is similar to receptors belonging to the low-density lipoprotein family ( 2 ) . iddm5 the region of chromosome 6 that contains the iddm5 locus includes the sod2 gene , which encodes mitochondrial superoxide dismutase . sod2 metabolizes harmful oxygen free radicals , which are intermediates in many biological reactions , and converts them into less reactive and less harmful molecules . there is some evidence that free oxygen radicals may play a role in the destruction of beta cells . enzymes such as sod2 may therefore offer protection against type 1 diabetes , and genetic variants of sod2 may increase susceptibility to disease ( 1 ) . iddm6 several candidate diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm6 locus . they include a gene associated with colorectal cancer ( dcc ) that may be linked with autoimmune disease , a gene that encodes a zinc finger dna binding domain ( znf236 ) that may be linked with diabetic kidney disease , and a molecule that opposes apoptosis ( bcl-2 ) ( 1 ) . iddm7 within the iddm7 locus on chromosome 2 are several candidate diabetes risk genes . one is neurod1 ( 3 ) , a transcription factor that is expressed widely in the developing brain and pancreas . neurod1 regulates the transcription of the insulin gene , and in addition to its association with type 1 diabetes , variants of this gene have been implicated in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes ; a mutation of this gene causes mody6 . other genes located within the iddm7 locus include igrp ( islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit-related protein ) , which encodes the beta cell-specific version of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase . Igrph as emerged as a major target of cell-mediated autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes ( 4 ) . many other candidate genes ( interleukin-1 gene cluster , hoxd8 , gad1 , galnt3 ) in this region have been investigated but none of these genes have been shown to be associated with type 1 diabetes ( 1 ) . iddm8 no diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm8 locus , which is found on chromosome 6. iddm9 the symbol iddm9 has not yet been approved.genetic factors in type 1 diabetes 23 iddm10 the gene gad2 is closely linked to the region of chromosome designated as iddm10 . glutamic acid decarboxylase ( gad ) catalyzes formation of the neurotransmitter gaba . targeting of this enzyme by autoantibodies has been implicated in the pathogenesis of stiff-man syndrome and type 1 diabetes . both diseases feature insulin deficiency , but stiff-man syndrome also bears the features of an autoimmune attack against the central nervous system , characterized by painful muscle spasms and increasing stiffness of axial muscles . the difference between stiff-man syndrome and type 1 diabetes may be because gadis expressed in two different isoforms : one is expressed in the central nervous system , and the other is in the beta cells ( 7 ) . the nature of the immune attack against these two isoforms also appears to be different ( 8 ) . the gad2 gene encodes gad65 , and this protein contains a 24-amino acid segment that is similar to an amino acid sequence found in the coxsackie virus , a suspected environmental trigger for the onset of type 1 diabetes . autoimmunity in iddm may thus arise by `` molecular mimicry '' between gad and a viral polypeptide ( 9 ) . however , evidence of cross-reactivity has not been demonstrated in immune cells from patients with diabetes . autoantibodies against gad have been found in patients who have had preclinical type 1 diabetes ( 10 ) . in the type 1 diabetes mouse , the expression of gad by beta cells is required for the development of autoimmune diabetes . complete suppression of beta-cell gad expression blocks the generation of diabetogenic tcells , leading to the theory that modulation of gad might have therapeutic value in type 1 diabetes ( 11 ) . iddm11 one candidate gene in the iddm11 locus is the ensagene , which encodes alpha-endosulphine . this protein is thought to be an endogenous regulator of the beta cell potassium channel ( katp channel ) . the katp channels co-ordinate a rise in blood glucose with insulin secretion . as glucose levels rise , the corresponding rise in atps huts the channel , leading to a change in membrane polarity . voltage-sensitive calcium channels flip open , allowing ca2+ ions to enter into the beta cells , triggering exocytosis of insulin . the katp channel pore is encoded by the kirgene , and the channel is regulated by the sulfonylurea receptor encoded by the abcc8 gene . recombinant alpha-endosulphine has been shown to inhibit the binding of the diabetes drug sulfonylurea to its receptor , to reduce the flow of k+ through the katp channel , and to stimulate insulin secretion ( 12 ) . another candidate gene in this region is the sel1 l gene . it is a negative regulator of the notch signalling pathway which controls the differentiation of pancreatic endocrine cells ( 13 ) . iddm12 several candidate genes have been located in the iddm12 locus , and the strongest candidates encode co- stimulatory receptors on the tcell . when the tcell is presented with a chain of amino acids , its t-cell receptor binds to the hla molecules that are presenting the chains . for the tcell to become fully activated , there is additional signaling between co-stimulatory receptors and corresponding ligands on the antigen-presenting cell . these co-stimulatory receptors are encoded by the candidate genes for type 1 diabetes susceptibility ctla4 , cd28 , and icos . read more about the role of ctla4 in type 1 diabetes . iddm13 several iddm13 candidate genes have been investigated , but variants of these genes have yet to be associated with type 1 diabetes.24 genetic landscape of diabetes iddm14 the symbol iddm14 has not yet been approved . iddm15 the iddm15 locus has been linked with type diabetes , and mutations near this region are associated with a rare form of diabetes called transient neonatal diabetes ( 14 ) . iddm16 one of the candidate genes in the iddm16 locus is the immunoglobulin heavy chain . immunoglobulins ( antibodies ) have a central role in the immune response against foreign antigens and in error can also attack self-antigens , resulting in autoimmune disease . immunoglobulins are known to interact with hla molecules , variants of which are associated with diabetes protection or susceptibility ( iddm1 contains the hla genes ) . immunoglobulins are composed of two heavy chains and two light chains , and the iddm16 locus contains the gene that encodes the heavy chain . genetically controlled differences in the immunoglobulin heavy chain may affect an individual 's immune response to self-antigens and thus alter the risk of developing autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes ( 1 ) . iddm17 the iddm17 locus was discovered to be linked to type 1 diabetes , but the candidate gene ( s ) is not yet known . the fas gene maps to this genomic area , but it has been excluded as a possible diabetes susceptibility gene . iddm18 acandidate diabetes susceptibility gene in the iddm18 locus is ilb12 . this gene encodes a subunit of il-12p40 , a signaling molecule secreted by white blood cells . in animal models , il-12 plays an important role in the induction of diabetes . in humans , variation in il-12p40 production may influence the reactivity of tcells and initiate or protect against autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes . an inhibitor of the immune response ( ctla4 ) summary immune cells are continually analyzing small chains of amino acids to detect infectious agents or tumor cells . when a foreign chain is found , the immune cells become activated and begin to attack . the ctla4 gene encodes a molecule that hinders the activation of immune cells . the region of the chromosome that contains ctla4 has been linked with susceptibility to many autoimmune diseases including type 1 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : cytotoxic t-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 official gene symbol : ctla4 alias : cd152 background one of the steps in mounting an immune response involves an interaction between two cells . the first cell , called the antigen-presenting cell ( apc ) , displays small chains of amino acids ( antigens ) on its surface , and they present these antigens to the second type of cell , tcells . once the tcell has analyzed the antigen , it can either become activated and launch an immune attack or be deactivated . in a healthy immune system , tcells become activated only to foreign antigens , such as fragments from bacteria or viruses . if the tcells become activated in response to self-antigens , autoimmune diseases such as diabetes results . optimal activation of the tcell requires a two-way interaction between the t-cell receptor and the antigen ( the first signal ) and between co-stimulatory receptors on the surface of the tcell with co-stimulatory ligands expressed by apcs ( the second signal ) . failure of the tcell to receive a second signal can lead to its deactivation . one of the co-stimulatory molecules on the tcell is called cytotoxic tlymphocyte-associated antigen ( ctla4 ) . ctla4 has a negative regulatory effect on the immune system because it down-regulates t-cell activation by interfering with the second signal . mice with a targeted disruption of the ctla4 gene develop a fatal disorder characterized by massive lymphocyte proliferation ( 1 ) . unlike other co-stimulator receptors on the tcell , ctla4 is only expressed when the tcell has been activated after antigen presentation . because it is only expressed in activated tcells , and because it down regulates the function of tcells , it is likely that ctla4 has a role in guarding against autoimmunity ( 2 ) . loss of this gene may result in activated tcells attacking self-antigens . indeed , genetic variants of ctla4 have been linked with autoimmune disorders such as autoimmune hypothyroid disease , graves ' disease ( 3 ) , systemic lupus erythematosus ( sle ) ( 4 ) , celiac disease ( 5 ) , and type 1 diabetes ( 6-8 ) . molecular information ctl4 amaps to iddm12 on chromosome 2 , and the equivalent area of the mouse genome has been linked to type 1 diabetes in the non-obese diabetic ( nod ) mouse ( 9 ) . it has four exons ( coding regions ) that span around 7,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 223 amino acids . the ctla4 protein contains an immunoglobulin v-like domain . a transmembrane region , and a putative cytoplasmic region that is identical to the mouse ctla4 protein . this conservation of the cytoplasmic region between species suggests that it has an important role in the functioning of ctla4 ( 10 ) . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the ctla4 gene , two ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein ( figure 2 ) . none of these variants have yet to be associated with disease ( see known allelic variants ) . a blast search using human ctla4 as a query finds proteins in 19 different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . ctla4 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on ctla4 and diabetes , search pub med . there are several snps in the 3 ' untranslated region of the ctla4 sequence that have been implicated in determining the risk for several common autoimmune disorders , including type 1 diabetes . one of the snps , termed ct60 , encodes a genotype that is either protective ( a/a ) or predisposes ( g/g ) toward autoimmune disease . the disease susceptibility gallele is common , being found in 50 % of individuals without autoimmune disorders , and is more common in individuals with graves ' disease ( 63 % ) . the g/ghaplotype correlated with lower production of the soluble alternative splice from of ctla4 ( s ctla4 ) compared with the protective a/ahaplotype . this reduction of s ctla4 levels could lead to reduced blocking of signals between tcells and apcs , leading to increased activation of tcells . this allele was also associated with type 1 diabetes but the effect was small ( 11 ) .genetic factors in type 1 diabetes 27 link roundup for ctla4 live searches diabetes and ctla4 in pub med pub med central books background information ctla4 in omimmolecular biology ctla4 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer immunoglobulin v-type domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure . location of ctla4 on the human genome . ctla4 maps to chromosome 2 , approximately between 204,930 and 204,945 kilobases ( kb ) . click on the image or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ctla4 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of ctla4 may fluctuate . type 2 diabetes has been loosely defined as `` adult onset '' diabetes , although as diabetes becomes more common throughout the world , cases of type 2 diabetes are being observed in younger people . it is increasingly common in children . in determining the risk of developing diabetes , environmental factors such as food intake and exercise play an important role . the majority of individuals with type 2 diabetes are either overweight or obese . inherited factors are also important , but the genes involved remain poorly defined . in rare forms of diabetes , mutations of one gene can result in disease . however , in type 2 diabetes , many genes are thought to be involved . `` diabetes genes '' may show only a subtle variation in the gene sequence , and these variations may be extremely common . the difficulty lies in linking such common gene variations , known as single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) , with an increased risk of developing diabetes . one method of finding the diabetes susceptibility genes is by whole-genome linkage studies . the entire genome of affected family members is scanned , and the families are followed over several generations and/or large numbers of affected sibling-pairs are studied . associations between parts of the genome and the risk of developing diabetes are looked for . to date only two genes , calpain 10 ( capn10 ) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha ( hnf4 a ) , have been identified by this method . the sulfonylurea receptor ( abcc8 ) summary sulfonylureas are a class of drugs used to lower blood glucose in the treatment of type 2 diabetes . these drugs interact with the sulfonylurea receptor of pancreatic beta cells and stimulate insulin release . the sulfonylurea receptor is encoded by the abcc8 gene , and genetic variation of abcc8 may impair the release of insulin . nomenclature official name : atp-binding cassette , sub-family c , member 8 official gene symbol : abcc8 alias : sulfonylurea receptor , sur , sur1 background the protein encoded by the abcc8 gene is a member of the atp-binding cassette transporters . these proteins use energy in the form of atp to drive the transport of various molecules across cell membranes . abcc8 belongs to a subfamily of transporters that contains the chloride channel that is mutated in cystic fibrosis ( cftr ) and also the proteins that are involved in multi-drug resistance . read more : the human atp-binding cassette ( abc ) transporter superfamily the abcc8 protein is also known as the sulfonylurea urea receptor ( sur ) . suris one of the proteins that composes the atp-sensitive potassium channel ( katp channel ) found in the pancreas ( 1 ) . the other protein , called kir6.2 , forms the core of the channel and is encoded by the kcnj11 gene . katp channels play a central role in glucose-induced insulin secretion by linking signals derived from glucose metabolism ( a rise in atp ) to membrane depolarization ( due to katp channels closing ) and the secretion of insulin.31 the activity of the katp channel regulates the release of insulin . the sulfonylureas are drugs that can modulate katp channel activity and are used in the treatment of type diabetes . by binding to sur , they inhibit the channel and stimulate the release of insulin . this leads to a lowering of blood glucose levels . the activity of the katp channel is also modulated by the subtype of sur ( sur , also known as sur1 , is encoded by abcc8 ; or sur2 a and sur2 b , which are encoded by abcc9 ) . in the pancreas , most katp channels are thought to be a complex of four sur1 proteins and four kir6.2 proteins . mutations in either abcc8 or kcnj11 can result in up-regulated insulin secretion , a condition termed familial persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) ( 2-4 ) . genetic variation in abcc8 has also been implicated in the impaired release of insulin that is seen in type 2 diabetes . molecular information abc genes are found in many different eukaryotic species and are highly conserved between species , indicating that many of these genes existed early in eukaryotic evolution . A blast search using human abcc8 as a query finds proteins in 30 different species , which include multicellular organisms ( metazoans ) , fungi , and plants . potential true homologous genes have been identified in the mouse and rat . by fluorescence in situ hybridization , it was found that the abbc8 gene maps to the short arm of chromosome 11. it has 41 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 84,000 bases . the abc transporter proteins , such as abcc8 , typically contain two atp-binding domains and two transmembrane domains . the atp-binding domains are also known as nucleotide binding folds ( nbfs ) , and mutations in either nbf1 or nbf2 can lead to phi . this suggests that both nbfregions of the surare needed for the normal regulation of katpchannel activity . as found in all proteins that bind atp , the nucleotide binding domains of the abcfamily of proteins contain characteristic motifs called walker aand b. the walker amotif contains a lysine residue that is critical for activating the katpchannel . when this lysine residue is mutated in nbf1 , but not nbf2 , the katpchannel can no longer be activated . in addition , abc genes also contain a signature c motif . the transmembrane domains contain 611 membrane spanning helices , and the abc c protein contains 6. these helices provide the protein with specificity for the molecule they transport across the membrane . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the abc c8 gene . usually snps linked with disease occur within the coding regions ( exons ) of the genes , and they result in a non-synonymous amino acid change . in abcc8 , there are seven such snps ( at the time of writing ) that cause a switch of amino acids in the mature protein . however , one of the snps of the abc c8 gene that has been linked with diabetes ( r1273 r ) does not cause an amino acid change ( see below ) . abc c8 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on abcc8 and diabetes , search pub med . the two genes that encode the katpchannel , abbc8 and kcnj11 , reside adjacent to one another on chromosome 11. a variant of abcc8 , called a1369 s , is in almost complete linkage disequilibrium with a variant of kcnj11 called e23 k. this means that from the genetic evidence , it is difficult to determine whether it is the a1369 s variant or the e23 k variant that predisposes to type 2 diabetes . a mutation in abc c8 was observed to cause an extremely rare form of diabetes , autosomal dominant diabetes , in a finnish family . the switch of glutamate to lysine at residue 1506 ( e1506 k ) in the sur1 protein caused a 32 genetic landscape of diabetes congenital hyperinsulinemia . the mutation reduced the activity of katp channels , increasing insulin secretion . by early adulthood , the ability of the beta cells to secrete adequate amounts of insulin was exhausted , leading to diabetes . A silent variant in exon 31 of the abc c8 gene has been associated with high concentrations of insulin in non- diabetic mexican americans . the codon agg is mutated to aga , but this still codes for the residue arginine ( r1273 r ) . the normal and mutant alleles were called g and a , respectively . among non-diabetics , those who were homozygous for the mutant allele ( aa genotype ) had higher levels of insulin when fasting , compared with heterozygotes ( ag ) and normal wild-type ( gg ) . because type 2 diabetes is more common in mexican americans than in the general us population , it has been proposed that individuals with the aa genotype are at a higher risk of diabetes because of an over-secretion of insulin . two common polymorphisms of the abcc8 gene ( exon 16-3t/c and exon 18 t/c ) have been variably associated with type 2 diabetes . however , a recent large case control study in britain revealed that these abcc8 variants did not appear to be associated with diabetes . location of abc c8 on the human genome . abc c8 maps to chromosome 11 , approximately between 17,370 and 17,470 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of abc c8 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of abcc8 may fluctuate . the live web site may , therefore , not appear exactly . the calpain 10 enzyme ( capn10 ) summary calpain 10 is a calcium-activated enzyme that breaks down proteins . variation in the non-coding region of the capn10 gene is associated with a threefold increased risk of type 2 diabetes in mexican americans . A genetic variant of capn10 may alter insulin secretion , insulin action , and the production of glucose by the liver . nomenclature official gene name : calpain 10 official gene symbol : capn10 alias : calcium-activated neutral protease genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 35 background the discovery of capn10 marks the first time that screening the entire genome led to the identification of a gene linked to a common and genetically complex disease such as type diabetes . in 1996 , a link was made between a region of chromosome 2 and an increased risk of diabetes in mexican americans in texas , usa . the region on the chromosome , located near the end of the long arm of chromosome 2 , was named niddm1 ( non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 1 ) . to pinpoint a gene that conferred risk , new statistical techniques were used , and the region was sequenced in greater and greater detail . four years later , a new diabetes susceptibility gene , capn10 , was discovered . the new gene encoded the enzyme calpain 10 , a member of the calpain family of cysteine proteases . these enzymes are activated by calcium and regulate the functions of other proteins by cleaving pieces off , leaving the altered protein either more or less active . in this way , they regulate biochemical pathways and are involved in intracellular signaling pathways , cell proliferation , and differentiation . for a detailed description of the action of cysteine proteases , visit stryer 's biochemistry calpains are found in all human cells , and 14 members of the calpain family are now known , many of which are associated with human disease . calpains 1 and 2 are implicated in causing injury to the brain after a stroke and also have been linked to the pathology seen in alzheimer 's disease . calpain 3 is mainly found in the muscle , and mutations cause limb-girdle muscular dystrophy . mutations of calpains in the worm caenorhabditis elegans affect sexual development , and mutations of a calpain-like gene in the fly cause a degeneration of parts of the nervous system . calpain 10 was an unexpected find in the search for a putative diabetes susceptibility gene . its link with diabetes is complex ; susceptibility is not attributable to a single variation but to several variations of dna that interact to either increase , decrease , or have no effect on the risk of developing diabetes . in mexican americans , it is thought that the highest risk combination of these variations results in a population-attributable risk of 14 % , i.e. , 14 % of mexican americans who have diabetes would not have diabetes if they did not have the high-risk genetic variant capn10 . calpain 10 is an atypical member of the calpain family , and its biological role is unknown . because capn10 m rna is expressed in the pancreas , muscle , and liver , its role in diabetes may involve insulin secretion , insulin action , and the production of glucose by the liver . molecular information calpains are found in all human cells and are found throughout the animal kingdom . a blast search using human capn10 as a query finds proteins in 18 different species , all of which are multicellular organisms ( metazoans ) . however , potential true homologous genes have been identified only in the mouse . the calpains consist of a large catalytic subunit and a small regulatory subunit . the large subunit contains four domains ( iiv ) , and the catalytic center of the cysteine protease is located in domain ii . domain I is the n- terminal domain that is processed when the enzyme is activated , domain iii is a linker domain , and the c- terminal domain iv binds calcium and resembles the calcium-binding protein , calmodulin . domain iv also has characteristic ef-hand motifs . calpain 10 is an atypical calpain in that it lacks the calmodulin-like domain iv and instead has a divergent c- terminal domain , domain t. calpains 5 and 6 also have a domain t , and together they form a subfamily of calpains . the capn10 has 13 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 30,000 bases . alternate splicing of the gene creates at least eight transcripts ( named isoform a through isoform h ) , which in turn encode proteins ranging from 138 to 672 amino acids in length . calpain isoform a is the most abundant iso form . it lacks exons 8 , 14 , and 15 but remains the longest transcript and encodes a protein of 672 amino acids that is found in all tissues , with the highest levels being found in the heart . although the structure of capn10 has not yet been solved , mapping the capn10 sequence to the crystal structure of human m-caplain ( also known as calpain 2 or capn2 ) gives a good estimate of structure . the domains span from residues 1672. many single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the capn10 gene . a surprise finding was that the snps linked with type 2 diabetes in the mexican americans were located in the non-coding regions ( introns ) of the gene . usually , snps linked with disease occur within the coding regions ( exons ) of the genes , and they result in a non-synonymous amino acid change . in calpain isoform a , there are four such snps ( at the time of writing ) that cause a switch of amino acids in the mature protein . however , the snps of the capn10 gene that have been linked with diabetes are located in introns ( introns 3 , 6 , and 19 ) , and because introns are not transcribed , they do not directly cause an amino acid change . instead , it is proposed that snps in capn10 introns may alter risk by affecting the transciptional regulation of calpain 10. over 10 % of mexican americans are affected by type 2 diabetes . by studying generations of mexican americans in star county , texas , it was found that snps in introns of the calpain 10 gene were associated with an increased susceptibility to diabetes . intron 3 of the capn10 gene contained snp-43 ( also called ucsnp-43 for university of chicago snp-43 ) in which adenine had been switched to guanine . the high-risk genotype is snp-43 g/g . snps were also found in intron 6 ( snp-19 ) and intron 13 ( snp-63 ) . together , these three snps interact to affect the risk of diabetes . with two different versions of the gene at three distinct sites , there are eight possible combinations , but only four combinations of alleles are commonly found . at each snpsite , the allele was labeled `` 1 '' and `` 2 '' . the most common combination in mexican americans was 112 on one chromosome and 121 on the other . this 112/121 combination was associated with a three-fold increased risk of diabetes . the high-risk combination also increased the risk of developing diabetes in northern europeans , but because the at-risk genotype is less common , it has less of a role in determining susceptibility in europeans . the genotype 112/111 had no effect on the risk of developing diabetes , and the 112/221 combination actually decreased the risk . similar to the mexican americans , the pima indians of arizona have a high prevalence of type 2 diabetes . however , in a study among the pima indians , no association was found between the high-risk genotype snp-43 g/gand an increased prevalence of diabetes , although g/gindividuals did have reduced expression of capn10 m rnaand showed signs of insulin resistance , which may increase susceptibility to diabetes . in europe , capn10 appears to contribute less to type 2 diabetes . in britain , there was no association between snp-43 , snp-19 , and snp-63 and diabetes , but it is possible that snps at other sites in the calpain gene may increase the type 2 diabetes risk . in a large study in scandinavians , no association was found between these three snps and diabetes . in asia , genetic variation in capn10 did not contribute to diabetes in japan or in the samoans of polynesia , although variations of capn10 may play a role in the risk of diabetes in the Chinese . the biological function of calpain has remained unknown for several years ; however , a recent study suggests that calpain 10 may have a critical role in beta cell survival . there are several intracellular stores of calcium ; one of these stores contains calcium channels that are sensitive to ryanodine ( ry r2 ) . in the beta cell , blocking ry r2 initiates a newly discovered pathway that activates capn10 and triggers cell death . link roundup for capn10 live searches diabetes and capn10 in pub med pub med central books background information calpain 10 in omimmolecular biology calpain 10 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer domains snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure 1. location of capn10 on the human genome . capn10 maps to chromosome 2 , approximately between 241,840 and 241,880 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of capn10 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of capn10 may fluctuate . the live web site may , therefore , not appear exactly . the glucagon receptor ( gcgr ) summary glucagon is a key hormone in the regulation of glucose levels . as such , the gcgr gene which encodes its receptor is a candidate diabetes susceptibility gene . a mutant glucagon receptor has been associated with diabetes . background glucagon , like insulin , is a peptide hormone that is secreted by the pancreas . unlike insulin , glucagon acts to promote the mobilization of fuels , particularly glucose . see figure 1 for a summary of the actions of insulin and glucagon on their three main target tissues , the liver , muscle , and adipose tissue . glucagon acts on the liver to stimulate glucose production , either from the breakdown of glycogen ( glycogenolysis ) or by the fresh production of glucose from the carbon skeletons of amino acids ( glucogenogenesis ) . in addition to raising blood glucose levels , glucagon also stimulates the formation of ketone bodies . glucagon does this by stimulating the release of free fatty acids ( ffas ) from adipose tissue , and when these enter the liver , glucagon directs their metabolic fate . instead of being used to make triglycerides ( a storage form of lipid ) , the ffas are shunted toward beta-oxidation and the formation of ketoacids , which can be used by several organs as an alternative fuel to glucose . the glucagon receptor is a member of the 7-transmembrane receptor ( 7 tm ) family . these receptors have also been called the serpentine receptors because of the way the single polypeptide chain of the receptor `` snakes '' back and forth across the cell membrane . this diverse family of receptors not only responds to hormones such as glucagon but also transmits many other signals including light , smell , and neurotransmitters . read more about 7 tm receptors in stryer 's biochemistry . when glucagon outside of the cell binds to the glucagon receptor , it induces a conformational change in the receptor that can be detected inside the cell . the activated receptor stimulates intracellular c amp production , which in turn stimulates protein kinase a ( pka ) to phosphorylate many target proteins , including two enzymes that lead to the breakdown of glycogen and inhibit further glycogen synthesis . molecular information the gcgr gene maps to chromosome 17. it has 14 exons ( coding regions ) that span around 10,700 bases . the 7 tm receptor encoded by this gene is also known as a g protein coupled 40 genetic landscape of diabetes receptor because a g protein ( guanyl nucleotide-binding protein ) conveys an intermediate step in signal transduction . in the unactivated state , the g protein coupled to the glucagon receptor exists as a heterotrimer consisting of , , and subunits . the subunit ( g ) binds gdp . many different g proteins exist , and for the glucagon receptor , because the activated g subunit stimulates adenylate cyclase , the receptor is classified as a gs receptor ( `` s '' for stimulatory effect of the subunit ) . binding of glucagon initiates the exchange of gs-bound gdp for gtp . the g protein then dissociates into gand a gdimer ; the latter transmits the signal that the receptor has bound its ligand . a single glucagon receptor can activate many g proteins , leading to a greatly amplified signal . the signal from an occupied glucagon receptor is `` switched off '' when the g hydrolyzes the bound gtp back to gdp , and the gdp-bound g can now reassociate with g to reform the heterotrimeric protein . A blast search using human gcgr as a query finds proteins in different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular organisms ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and fruit fly . Gcgr and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on gcgr and diabetes . the enzyme glucokinase ( gck ) summary glucokinase , encoded by the gckgene speeds up glucose metabolism and acts as a `` glucose sensor '' in the beta cell . mutant glucokinase causes a rare form of diabetes and may also play a role in type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : glucokinase official gene symbol : gckalias : gk , hexokinase iv , hk4 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 2 , mody2 background the enzyme glucokinase catalyzes glucose metabolism in the liver and in the pancreatic beta cell . glucokinase traps glucose inside the cell by catalyzing its phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this is the first and rate-limiting step in glycosis , a pathway that produces energy in the form of atp from glucose . glucokinase ( also called hexokinase iv ) differs from the other hexokinases that are found in other tissues . first , glucokinase has a lower affinity for glucose . this allows other organs such as the brain and muscles to have first call on glucose when their supply is limited . A second feature is that glucokinase is not inhibited by its product , glucose-6-phosphate . this lack of negative feedback inhibition enables hepatic glucokinase to remain active 42 genetic landscape of diabetes while glucose is abundant , ensuring that the liver can continue removing glucose from the blood ensuring that no glucose goes to waste . glucokinase is proposed to be an important `` glucose sensor '' in the following way . the rate of glucose metabolism is determined by the rate of glucose phosphorylation , which is catalyzed by glucokinase in the liver and pancreas . the liver and pancreas also express glucose transporter ( glut2 ) , an insulin-independent cellular protein that mediates the transport of glucose into cells . the capacity of glut2 to transport glucose is very high , facilitating rapid equilibrium between extracellular and intracellular glucose . thus , in effect , the extracellular glucose concentrations are sensed by glucokinase . by catalyzing the rate-limiting step of glucose metabolism in the liver , glucokinase enables the liver to buffer the rise in glucose that takes place after a meal . in the pancreas , glucokinase is the glucose sensor for insulin release . the threshold for glucose-stimulated insulin release is about 5 mmol/l . mutations of gck that alter this threshold manifest as three different syndromes and highlight the importance of gck in glucose homeostasis and diabetes : 1.activating mutations lower the beta cell threshold for insulin release to as low as 1.5 mmol/l of glucose , leading to an increase in insulin release . this manifests as persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) . 2.inactivating mutations raise the beta cell threshold for insulin release . if two alleles altered by inactivating mutations are inherited , the level of glucose needed to stimulate insulin release from the pancreas is extremely high . affected individuals present with diabetes at birth ( permanent neonatal diabetes ) . 3.maturity onset diabetes in the young , type 2 ( mody2 ) is caused by inheriting one allele that has been altered by an inactivating mutation . this partial inactivation leads to an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin release to about 7 mmol/l . this causes a mild hyperglycemia that is present at birth but often is only detected in later life . because of its role as a glucose sensor , gck is a candidate susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes . molecular information the hexokinase family consists of several enzymes that are all evolutionarily related . in vertebrates , there are four hexokinases named ito iv . glucokinase is a distinct member of this family . a blast search using human gck as a query finds proteins in 46 different species , which range from metazoa ( multicellular organisms ) , fungi , plants , and other eukaryotes . potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse , rat , fly , mosquito , nematode worm , and the plant , mouse-ear cress . the gck gene maps to chromosome 7. it has 12 exons ( coding regions ) that span around 46,000 bases . there are three gck transcript variants that differ in their first exon , and their expression is tissue specific . one isoform predominates in the pancreatic beta cells ; the other two isoforms are found in the liver . the glucokinase enzyme is found in the outer membrane compartment of mitochondria in these tissues . these mutations are all clustered in one area of the glucokinase structure that is remote from the substrate binding site , and this region has been termed the allosteric activator site . because naturally occurring mutations at this site are associated with an increase in insulin release , the search began for pharmacological allosteric activators that could increase gck activity , increase the release of insulin , and be used in the treatment of diabetes . the metabolic changes that take place in type diabetes include impaired insulin secretion from the pancreas and increased glucose production by the liver . in turn , studies of gluckokinase activators ( gkas ) appear to show a dual mechanism of action : they increase the release of insulin from the pancreas and stimulate the use of glucose in the liver , thus making gkas ideal candidates for diabetes therapy . the glucose transporter glut2 summary the glut2 gene encodes a glucose transporter which regulates the entry of glucose into pancreatic beta cells and is thought to be a `` glucose sensor '' . mutations of glut2 cause a rare genetic syndrome that disrupts blood glucose regulation . common variants of glut2 may be linked with type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : solute carrier family 2 ( facilitated glucose transporter ) , member 2 official gene symbol : slc2 a2 alias : glucose transporter 2 , glut2 background the family of glucose transporter proteins transports glucose across plasma membranes . the proteins are facilitative transporters carrying glucose across membranes without requiring energy . each member of the family has its own specialized function and tissue distribution . for a summary of the family of glucose transporters , named glut1 to glut5 , read stryer 's biochemistry . beta cells in the pancreas express glut2 . the transporter has a low affinity for glucose , requiring a high concentration of glucose to achieve half its maximal rate of transport ( high km ) . this enables the beta cell to only begin the insulin secretion cascade during times of plenty . by regulating the entry of glucose into the beta cell , it has been proposed that glut2 is an important `` glucose sensor '' . glut2 is also found in the liver and transports glucose both into and out of liver cells . it allows the liver to buffer changes in glucose concentration after a meal . glut2 has a high capacity for glucose , so once the glucose levels have risen , the liver can quickly remove large amounts of glucose from the blood into the liver cells . genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 45 mutations in the gene that encodes glut2 , called slc2 a2 , cause an extremely rare genetic syndrome called fanconi-bickel syndrome ( fbs ) ( ) . Fbs was named for the scientists who first described the condition in 1949 , and since then over 100 cases have been observed . affected individuals may exhibit hyperglycemia in the fed state and/or hypoglycemia during fasting . hyperglycemia in fbs may involve inappropriate glucose uptake into the liver and this hyperglycemia could be further enhanced by inappropriate insulin secretion by the pancreas . the rise in liver intracellular glucose may inhibit the breakdown of glycogen , leading to low levels of glucose in the blood and increased levels of glycogen stored in the liver . A transport defect of the kidneys also leads to the loss of glucose in the urine which further worsens the hypoglycemia . whereas mutations of slc2 a2 cause a rare genetic syndrome that disrupts glucose regulation , it is possible that variations of this gene may also be involved in type 2 diabetes , a common form of diabetes . molecular information the glut2 gene maps to chromosome 3. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 31,400 bases . members of the glucose transporter family each consist of a single polypeptide of about 500 residues long . this peptide crosses the membrane several times , and there are typically 12 transmembrane segments . the translocation of glucose across the membrane is thought to involve inward-facing and outward-facing glucose binding sites that are located in transmembrane segments 9 , 10 , and 11 of the glutprotein . mutations of these regions severely impair glucose transport ( 4-6 ) . A highly conservered motif , ( r ) xgrr , is found not only in the facilitative glucose transporters but also in the sugar transport superfamily . mutations that disrupt this conserved sequence result in the fanconi-bickel syndrome . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the glut2 gene , four ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . one of these variants ( t110 i ) may be associated with type 2 diabetes status , and different variants have been associated with the fanconi-bickel syndrome ( view known allelic variants ) . the problem of fuel transport appears to have been solved early in evolutionary terms . a blast search using human slc2 a2 as a query finds proteins in 55 different species that include sugar transporters in organisms as diverse as bacteria , fungi , plants , and multicellular species ( metazoa ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . slc2 a2 is a likely candidate gene for type 2 diabetes because it is a high km transporter that regulates entry of glucose in the pancreatic beta cell and triggers insulin secretion . in one diabetic patient , a mutation that disrupts a highly conserved valine in the 5th membrane spanning domain of glut2 was found . the valine at position 197 was switched to an isoleucine residue ( v197 i ) . expression of this mutant protein in xenopus oocytes abolished the transporter activity of glut2 , suggesting that defects in glut2 may have a causative role in the development of diabetes . many studies have been unsuccessful in finding evidence of association between snps in the slc2 a2 gene and type 2 diabetes . one snp that may be significant is a threonine to isoleucine switch at residue 110 ( t110 i ) , which occurs in the second membrane spanning domain of glut2 . this snpis present equally in 46 genetic landscape of diabetes diabetics and non-diabetics , but in one additional study a modest association between the t110 ivariant and type 2 diabetes was observed . the functional role of this polymorphism remains unclear as the variant protein appears to have similar levels of expression and does not seem to disrupt glucose transporter activity . the hnf4 a gene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas . because hnf4 a maps to a region of chromosome 20 that is linked with type 2 diabetes and because mutations of this gene cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes , the hnf4 a gene is considered to be a strong candidate for involvement in type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha official gene symbol : hnf4 a alias : transcription factor 14 , tcf14 background the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver is regulated by the transcription factor hnf4 a ( hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha ) . many functions that the liver carries out may appear and disappear , depending on 48 genetic landscape of diabetes whether hnf4 ais expressed . in addition , hnf4 a controls the expression of another transcription factor ; hepatocyte nuclear factor ( hnf1 a ) , which in turn regulates the expression of several important genes in the liver . as the name suggests , hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 is found in abundance in the liver , but it is also found in the beta cells of the pancreas , the kidneys , and intestines . together with other transcription factors such as hnf1 a and hnf1 b ( encoded by tcf1 and tcf2 , respectively ) , they make up part of a network of transcription factors that function together to control gene expression in the developing embryo . in particular , hnf4 a is thought to play an important role in the development of the liver , kidney , and intestines . in pancreatic beta cells , this network of transcription factors regulates the expression of the insulin gene . in addition , hnf4 and hnf1 regulate the expression of several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g. , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport and glucose metabolism . mutations of hnf4 a can cause an extremely rare form of diabetes , maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) . whereas type 2 diabetes is a disorder usually of late onset with significant genetic basis , mody by definition occurs in the young ( onset at age less than 25 years ) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion . patients with mody caused by hnf4 a mutations exhibit a normal response to insulin ( they are not insulin resistant ) but do show an impaired response to secreting insulin in the presence of glucose . over time , the amount of insulin secreted decreases , leading to diabetes . affected individuals are usually treated with oral hypoglycemic agents , but up to 40 % of patients may require insulin . this form of diabetes is extremely rare and has only been identified in 13 families . the hnf4 a gene is suspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes . because a mutation of this gene causes a rare form of diabetes and because the gene maps to an area of chromosome 20 that has been linked with type 2 diabetes , it is speculated that particular hnf4 a haplotypes may be associated with altered insulin secretion . molecular information hepatocyte nuclear factors ( hnfs ) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation and metabolism . hnf4 ais an orphan receptor ; the ligand ( s ) that binds to this receptor is unknown . a blast search using human hnf4 a as a query finds proteins in 47 different species , which are all multicellular species ( metazoans ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse , rat , and nematode worm . the hnf4 agene maps to chromosome 20. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 30,000 bases . there are at least three different transcript variants of this gene , which encode three different protein isoforms ( a , b , and c ) . the longest m rna transcript , nm000457 , encodes the longest hnf4 a protein ( isoform b ) , containing over 450 amino acids . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the hnf4 agene . at the time of writing , three non-synonymous amino acid changes caused by snps have been observed in the longest protein isoform ( isoform b ) . at present , none of these snps have been associated with either type 2 diabetes or mody ( see known allelic variants ) . however , several snps upstream of the coding region have been associated with both modyand type 2 diabetes . it has been proposed that the pancreatic beta cell is sensitive to the amount of hnf4 a present . a variety of nonsense and missense mutations in hnf4 a cause mody , where a decline in insulin secretion occurs . similarly , snps of the gene may have an impact on the beta cell function , increasing or decreasing insulin secretion . in one british study , a haplotype that was linked with reduced disease risk was identified ( 5 ) . individuals with the `` reduced risk '' haplotype were significantly associated with increased insulin secretion . these individuals also showed a trend toward lower fasting glucose levels and 2-hour plasma glucose levels . this finding led to the speculation that a particular hnf4 a haplotype might be associated with increased insulin secretion capacity and protection against diabetes . genetic variants associated with increased diabetes risk have been identified upstream of the hnf4 a coding region , in a recently discovered alternative promoter called p2 . p2 lies 46 kb upstream of the p1 promoter , and while both promoters are involved in the transcription of hnf4 a , they seem to have different roles in different cells . transcripts from both p1 and p2 have been found in the pancreas , but the p2 promoter is thought to be the primary transcription site in the beta cells and a mutation of p2 is a cause of mody . in the search for genetic variation near the hnf4 a gene , two studies , one of the ashkenazi jew population , and the other of the finnish population ( 8 ) , identified four snps that were associated with type 2 diabetes . these snps ( named rs4810424 , rs1884613 , rs1884614 , and rs2144908 ) flanked the p2 promoter and were associated figure 1. location of hnf4 aon the human genome . hnf4 a maps to chromosome 20 , approximately between 43,700 and 43,750 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of hnf4 a in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of hnf4 a may fluctuate . therefore , the live web site may not appear exactly as in this figure.50 genetic landscape of diabetes with type diabetes risk in both study populations , and the risk of diabetes attributed to each snp was very similar between the two populations . the mechanism by which snps near and in the hnf4 agene increases the risk of diabetes is not yet known . perhaps because many hnf transcription factors can bind directly to the p2 promoter , any alteration of the binding sites for these factors could disrupt the regulation of hnf4 a expression . whereas both p1 and p2 promoters are used in liver cells , mainly p2 is used in pancreas cells , leading to snps affecting the p2 promoter disproportionately affecting hnf4 a expression in the pancreas , in turn leading to beta cell malfunction and diabetes . the insulin hormone ( ins ) summary the ins gene encodes the precursor to the hormone insulin . genetic variations of the insulin gene ( variable number tandem repeats and snps ) may play a role in susceptibility to type 1 and type 2 diabetes . background insulin is a hormone that has a wide range of effects on metabolism . its overall action is to encourage the body to store energy rather than use it , e.g. , insulin favors the storage of glucose as glycogen or fat as opposed to breaking down glucose to release atp . for a summary of the actions of insulin , see the physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation . insulin is composed of two distinct polypeptide chains , chain a and chain b , which are linked by disulfide bonds . many proteins that contain subunits , such as hemoglobin , are the products of several genes . however , insulin is the product of one gene , ins.52 genetic landscape of diabetes ins actually encodes an inactive precursor called preproinsulin . preproinsulin is processed into proinsulin by removal of a signaling peptide ; however , proinsulin is also inactive . the final processing step involves removal of a c-peptide ( a connecting peptide that links chain a to chain b ) , and this process produces the mature and active form of insulin . for further information , see the story of insulin . molecular information several species , including the rat , mouse , and some species of fish , have two insulin genes . in contrast , in humans there is a single insulin gene that is located on chromosome . it has three exons ( coding regions ) that span about 2,200 bases . exon 2 encodes the b chain , along with the signal peptide and part of the c-peptide found in the insulin precursors . exon 3 encodes the a chain and the remainder of the c-peptide . c-peptide is secreted in equal amounts to insulin , but it has long been thought that it has no biological role . however , in diabetic rats c-peptide has been shown to reduce the dysfunction of blood vessels and the nervous system that is common in diabetes . c-peptide contains the greatest variation among species , whereas regions of insulin that bind to the insulin receptor are highly conserved . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the ins gene , none ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein ( see the allelic variants that are known to be associated with disease ) . a blast search using the human proinsulin precursor as a query finds proteins in 107 different species , which are all metazoans apart from three plants and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . the gene contains a variable number of tandem repeats , and it has been proposed that the number of repeats may have an impact on birth weight and diabetes susceptibility . in one study , a dna variant in the 3 ' untranslated region of the ins gene was associated with type 2 diabetes risk . certain mutations of the insulin gene can result in a rare form of diabetes . one form of mutant insulin , called chicago insulin , has been found in individuals who have diabetes that resembles mody . this form of diabetes is rare ; it is caused by a single gene ( is monogenic ) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion . mutations of insulin affecting the phenylalanine amino acid at position 24 or 25 of the b chain ( b24 or b25 ) are associated with diabetes . in chicago insulin , b25 is mutated to leucine , or b24 is mutated to serine . the phenylalanine at position 24 is highly conserved , and in crystal structures of insulin , the aromatic ring of this amino acid is important in anchoring the region of the insulin that binds to the insulin receptor . point mutations of ins can also result in increased levels of proinsulin ( proinsulinemia ) . a switch from arginine to histidine at amino acid position 65 results in proinsulinemia , when it is probable that the mutation of arginine 65 disrupts the site at which the c-peptide is cleaved by beta cell proteases to produce insulin from proinsulin . this mutation does not appear to impair glucose tolerance in heterozygous carriers . other point mutations of arginine 65 have been found in individuals with type 2 diabetes and a raised level of insulin and/or proinsulin . however , one of the individuals had a arg65 pro mutation that was not genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 53 thought to be linked to their diabetes , because the mutation was present in a non-diabetic daughter and absent in a daughter who had had gestational diabete . location of ins on the human genome . ins maps to chromosome 11 , approximately between 2,144 and 2,148 kilobases ( kb ) . the insulin receptor ( insr ) summary the insr gene encodes the receptor for insulin . mutations of the insulin receptor can cause rare forms of diabetes and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . background some receptors found on the surfaces of cells are directly linked to enzymes located inside the cell . the insulin receptor belongs to the largest family of such enzyme-linked receptors , known as the receptor protein-tyrosine kinase ( rtk ) family . more than 50 rtks have been identified , and they share a common structure : an n-terminal extracellular domain containing a ligand-binding site , a single transmembrane helix , and a c-terminal cytosolic domain with protein-tyrosine kinase activity . receptor tyrosine kinases in molecular cell biology most of the rtks consist of single polypeptides , and in response to ligand binding , they dimerize . an exception is the insulin receptor that exists as a dimer in the absence of its ligand . after the ligand has bound to and activated its receptor , the tyrosine kinase activity of the cystolic domain of the rtk is activated . each kinase genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 55 phosphorylates specific tyrosine residues in the cytosolic domain of its dimer partner , a process termed autophosphorylation . autophosphorylation occurs in two stages . first , tyrosine residues near the catalytic site are phosphorylated . in the insulin receptor , this results in a conformational change that permits atp binding , and it may also increase the receptor protein kinase activity . the receptor kinase then phosphorylates other tyrosine residues outside the catalytic domain , creating phosphotyrosine residues that serve as docking ports for additional proteins that transmit intracellular signals downstream of the activated receptors . read more on the signal pathways initiated by insulin binding in molecular cell biology one important docking protein in the insulin receptor is irs1 ( insulin receptor substrate ) . irs1 binds to the phosphotyrosine residues in activated receptors via its src homology 2 ( sh2 ) domains . binding of insulin to its receptor can initiate two distinct signaling pathways : one that includes ras , and one that does not . the initiation of both pathways appears to involve irs1 . molecular information the insulin receptor is a dimer , consisting of two polypeptide chains that are linked by disulfide bonds . each polypeptide contains an alpha subunit ( extracellular ) and a beta sub-unit ( transmembrane and intracellular ) . the alpha and beta subunits are encoded by a single gene , insr , which maps to chromosome 19. it has 23 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 180,000 bases . the insr gene encodes a precursor that starts with an 27-amino acid signal sequence , followed by the receptor alpha subunit , the cleavage site of the processing enzyme , and the receptor beta subunit . depending upon where the insulin receptor is expressed , there are differences in its composition . the alpha subunit found in insr in the liver differs from its form in muscle and adipose tissue in terms of molecular weight , carbohydrate composition , and antigenicity . the level of activity of its tyrosine kinase may also differ , depending on the tissue in which the receptor is expressed . the mechanism underlying receptor heterogeneity is unknown . alternative splicing of exon 11 of the insr gene generates two insulin receptor isoforms , insr type a ( without exon 11 ) and insr type b ( with exon 11 ) . these two transcripts are expressed in a highly regulated fashion and predominate in different tissues . there is evidence that selectivity in the action of insulin may be brought about by the two insr isoforms . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the insr gene , one ( at the time of writing ) of which causes non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . this protein variant has not been associated with observed cases of disease . a blast search using human insr as a query finds proteins in 42 different species , which are all metazoans apart from two viruses . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and mosquito . Insr and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on insr and diabetes , search pub med . mutations in insr lead to a variety of rare clinical syndromes ranging in severity from leprechaunism ( usually fatal within the first 2 years of life ) , rabson-mendenhall syndrome ( survival into the second decade ) , and type ainsulin resistance ( survival into middle age and beyond ) .56 genetic landscape of diabetes resistance to insulin is one of the characteristics of type diabetes . however , most diabetics have a normal sequence of the insulin receptor , indicating that if insulin receptor mutations contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes , they will be present only in a minor fraction of the diabetic population . several variants of the insulin receptor have been associated with hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes . a heterozygous mutation changing val-985 into methionine has been found to be more common in type 2 diabetics than in controls ; the relative risk for diabetes was over 4 % for met-985 carriers . the prevalence of the mutation increased with increasing serum glucose levels , suggesting a role for this receptor variant in hyperglycemia . potassium channels in the beta cells of the pancreas triggers the release of insulin . drugs that close the channel are used in the treatment of diabetes . variation of the kcnj11 gene which encodes this channel has been linked to both increased and decreased insulin release . nomenclature official gene name : potassium inwardly-rectifying channel , subfamily j , member official gene symbol : kcnj11 alias : inwardly rectifying potassium channel , kir6.2 ; beta-cell inward rectifie r subunit , bir ; atp-sensitive inward rectifier potassium channel 11 , ikatp background similar to all cells , pancreatic beta cells maintain a concentration gradient of electolytes ( e.g. , potassium , sodium , and calcium ) across their membranes . ion pumps create the gradient by pushing sodium ( na+ ) out of cells and potassium ( k+ ) into cells . this produces a membrane polarity ; the inner side of the membrane has a negative charge of around -70 m v. to maintain the membrane potential and to be able to alter it , specific proteins called ion channels span the membrane and regulate the passage of ions . the release of insulin is controlled by ion channels that conduct k+ and are sensitive to atp ( katpchannels ) . arise in glucose and the corresponding rise in atp shuts the katp channels , which increases the membrane potential to -40 m v. this state , known as depolarization , opens calcium channels , and the entry of ca2+ into the cell triggers the secretion of insulin . drugs ( e.g. , sulfonylureas ) that close beta cell katpchannels are used to treat type 2 diabetes . they are referred to as `` oral hypoglycemic agents '' because they are taken by mouth and stimulate the release of insulin , which lowers blood sugar levels . the katp channel consists of two types of sub-unit : a k+-channel subunit ( termed kir6.2 ) , and a sulfonylurea receptor subunit ( sur ) , which is a member of the family of atp-binding cassette ( abc ) transporter proteins . the potassium channel is made from four kir6.2 subunits and four sursubunits . the kir6.2 subunit is encoded by the kcnj11 gene . the four kir6 . 2 subunits form the pore of the channel through which k+ passes and also contains the atp-binding sites . the abcc8 gene encodes the sursubunit . the four sursubunits modulate the activity of the channel and contain the binding site of the sulfonylurea drugs . mutations in either kcnj11 or abbc8 can reduce katpchannel activity , leading to increased insulin release and low blood sugar levels , a rare disorder called persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) . in contrast , mice that have targeted overactivity of the katp channel have severe diabetes , and in humans , activating mutations of kcnj11 cause permanent neonatal diabetes . molecular information the kcnj11 gene maps to chromosome 11. it has only one exon ( coding region ) that spans about 2000 bases ( 2 kilobases , or 2 kb ) and does not contain introns ( non-coding regions ) ( see evidence ) . the gene encodes a protein of 390 amino acids and two transmembrane segments . genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 59 each kir6 . subunit is associated with a much larger sursubunit and also contains a binding site for atp . the binding of one molecule of atp causes a conformational change in the channel protein that closes the channel . a blast search using human kcnj11 as a query finds proteins in 30 different species , which are all metazoans . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and nematode . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the kcnj11 gene , four ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . at least two of these , rs5219 which encodes the e23 k polymorphism and rs5215 which encodes the i337 v polymorphism , have been associated with impaired insulin response and increased risk of type 2 diabetes ( see below ) . figure 1. insulin secretion . 1. glucose is transported into the beta cell by type 2 glucose transporters ( glut2 ) . once inside , the first step in glucose metabolism is the phosphorylation of glucose to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this step is catalyzed by hexokinase ; it is the rate-limiting step in glycolysis , and it effectively traps glucose inside the cell . 2. as glucose metabolism proceeds , atp is produced in the mitochondria . 3. the increase in the atp : adp ratio closes atp-gated potassium channels in the beta cell membrane . positively charged potassium ions ( k+ ) are now prevented from leaving the beta cell . 4. the rise in positive charge inside the beta cell causes depolarization . 5. voltage-gated calcium channels open , allowing calcium ions ( ca2+ ) to flood into the cell . 6. the increase in intracellular calcium concentration triggers the secretion of insulin via exocytosis.60 genetic landscape of diabetes kcnj11 and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on kcnj11 and diabetes , search pub med . three common snps ( e23 k , l270 v , and i337 v ) have been found in the kcnj11 gene in caucasians ( -13 ) . the e23 kvariant is caused by a switch of guanine to adenine , resulting in a glutamic acid ( e ) to lysine ( k ) substitution at codon 23. analysis of the e23 k variant in various caucasian populations shows that kkhomozygosity has a stronger association with diabetes compared with heterozygous ekor the wild-type ee . however , this risk has not been observed in other caucasian populations . to investigate the effect of e23 k , l270 v , and i337 von the functioning of the katpchannel , human potassium channels containing these snps were made . only one variant , e23 k , altered channel function ; it made the channel less sensitive to atp . therefore , the e23 kchannels were more excitable ; they needed greater amounts of atp before they closed and so were more likely to remain open . because the release of insulin is inhibited when the katp channel is open , e23 k is thought to contribute to the development of diabetes by impairing insulin release ( 14-16 ) . the two genes that encode the katpchannel , abbc8 and kcnj11 , reside adjacent to one another on chromosome 11 . A variant of abcc8 , called a1369 s , is in almost complete linkage disequilibrium with the e23 k variant of kcnj11 . this means that from the genetic evidence , it is difficult to determine whether it is the a1369 s variant or the e23 k variant that predisposes to type 2 diabetes . individuals who are obese or have type diabetes , a chronic elevation of free fatty acids is seen . this leads to the accumulation of long-chain acyl-co as in pancreatic beta cells that stimulate k atp channels and inhibit insulin release . the diabetogenic effect of possessing both the e23 k and i337 v variants may involve an enhanced stimulatory effect of long-chain acyl-co as in polymorphic k atp channels . the theory that variations in the kcnj11 gene may inhibit insulin secretion is supported by a study of adults who did not have diabetes but did have the e23 ksnp . it was found that e23 kwas associated with a impaired insulin release in response to glucose and also an increased body mass index ( bmi ) ( 19 ) . link roundup for kcnj11 live searches diabetes and kcnj11 in pub med pub med central books background information omimmolecular biology kcnj11 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure 3 . Snp positions of kcnj11 mapped to the 3d structure of inward rectifier potassium channel 1. the figure shows the positions of some of the non-synonymous amino acid changes ( green residues ) caused by snps in the coding sequence . the enzyme lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) summary lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) is an enzyme that breaks down triglycerides . Lpl is functionally impaired or present at low levels in many type 2 diabetics . some evidence suggests that insulin plays a role in regulating lpl synthesis . background cholesterol and triglycerides circulate in the blood as a complex with proteins , called lipoproteins . there are several different types of lipoprotein : high-density lipoprotein ( hdl ) , intermediate-density lipoprotein ( idl ) , low-density lipoprotein ( ldl ) , and very low-density lipoprotein ( vldl ) . Vldl and ldlare sometimes referred to as bad cholesterol because they deposit cholesterol in arteries , which over time contributes to the lipid core of atherosclerotic plaques . ldlmakes up 6070 % of the total cholesterol in blood , whereas vldl makes up 1015 % . Idl is an intermediate between vldl and ldl . it is richer in cholesterol than vldl and in clinical tests gets collected with the ldl fraction . hdl , sometimes referred to as good cholesterol , makes up about 30 % of blood cholesterol . the level of hdlis inversely correlated with the risk of coronary heart disease , and it seems to play a protective role . Hdl might carry cholesterol away from the arteries to the liver , where it is broken down . for more information about blood cholesterol levels , visit the national heart , blood , and lung institute . the breakdown and reformation of lipoproteins are interlinked via several steps that often require the action of enzymes , one of which is lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) . it is found in heart , muscle , and adipose tissue , where it breaks down triglycerides in vldl and chylomicrons by hydrolysis into idl ( intermediate-density lipoprotein ) , fatty acids , and glycerol . although the fatty acids can be used as fuel , the idl , which is richer in cholesterol than vldl , is taken up by the liver or is formed into ldl ( low-density lipoprotein ) . Lpl activity also indirectly raises hdl levels because lpl-mediated hydrolysis of vldl provides surface components that merge with hdl3 to form hdl2 particles . for a detailed description of lipoprotein interconversions , visit the university of manitoba . as well as the well-established role of lpl in lipid metabolism , it can also bind specific cell-surface proteins , often via heparan sulfate proteoglycans attached to epithelial cells . this action is independent of any catalytic activity , which means that lpl can `` bridge '' lipoproteins and the surface of cells , leading to an increase in the cellular uptake of lipoproteins . in the blood vessel wall , this action is thought to be proatherogenic . severe mutations in lpl cause a deficiency that results in type ihyperlipoproteinemia , a disorder characterized by high levels of lipoprotein and triglycerides in the blood.64 genetic landscape of diabetes molecular information lipoprotein lipase was so difficult to purify that the protein sequence had to be determined from the nucleotide sequence of its c dna . the lpl gene maps to chromosome . it has 10 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 28,800 bases . the gene encodes a preprotein of 475 amino acids that contains a signal peptide . cleavage of the signal results in a mature protein of 448 amino acids . lipoprotein lipase , along with hepatic lipase and pancreatic lipase , makes up a lipase superfamily ; that is , based on a comparison of the amino acid sequence , all three proteins appear to have evolved from a common ancestor . all lipases , including evolutionarily unrelated prokaryotic lipases , share a serine protease-like catalytic triad of amino acids ( ser-his-asp ) . another class of enzyme , serine proteases , hydrolyzes peptide bonds in many biological settings , for example , within the blood-clotting cascade . the similar catalytic triad seen in the lipase superfamily suggests that a similar mechanism of hydrolysis is used , this time to hydrolyze fats rather than peptides . site-directed mutagenesis experiments on lpl support this hypothesis . although the structure of lplhas not yet been solved , mapping the lpl sequence to the crystal structure of pancreatic lipase gives a good estimate of the structure of lpl . although the enzymatic activity involving the catalytic triad is in the large amino-terminal lipase domain ( residues 1312 ) , the smaller carboxy-terminal domain ( the plat/lh2 domain ; residues 313448 ) binds the lipoprotein substrate . in nature , lpl occurs as a homodimer and , when in this form , binds to cell-surface molecules via several heparin-binding sites , a function that is thought to increase the cellular uptake of lipoproteins . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the lpl gene , seven ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . at least three of these ( rs268 , rs328 , and rs1801177 ) have been associated with observed cases of type ihyperlipoproteinemia ( allelic variants .0033 , .0014 , and .0035 , respectively ) . a blast search using human lpl as a query finds proteins in 38 different species , which are all metazoans apart from one bacterium , trichodesmium erythraeum , an oceanic nitrogen producer . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . a common complication of type 2 diabetes is microalbuminuria , that is , protein being excreted in the urine because of kidney damage through chronic inflammation . in a study of 386 type 2 diabetic patients , a correlation was found between the presence/severity of microalbuminuria and genetic variants of lpl . higher concentrations of ldl constituents have been linked previously to progression of microalbuminuria . furthermore , foam cells ( white blood cells that have `` mopped up '' excess ldl or vldl ) are observed in many chronic inflammatory diseases , including atherosclerosis and kidney disease . these observations point to a possible role for altered lpl in the progression of inflammatory kidney disease , and therefore the microalbuminuria often seen in diabetes type 2 patients . more articles like this another study compared the levels of lpl in the blood of 40 type 2 diabetes patients and a group of healthy individuals prior to heparin injection ( 10 ) . because functional lpl is usually anchored to heparan sulfate proteoglycans on the surface of cells , heparin injection releases the enzyme into the blood . the amount of lpl in the type 2 diabetes patients was significantly lower than that of healthy individuals . however , after a course of insulin , the levels of lpl were increased in the diabetic patients . because this increase can not be attributed to released lpl because no heparin injection was given , it must be caused by the administered insulin . this genetic factors in type 2 diabetes finding supports previous work showing that insulin plays a role in regulating lpl synthesis . more articles like this the h+ allele of the t495 ghind iii polymorphism of lpl is associated with coronary heart disease . this polymorphism was further investigated in 785 chinese subjects , of which about 60 % had been diagnosed with early-onset type 2 diabetes ( < 40 years old ) . within this subset , the polymorphism was associated with higher plasma triglyceride and lower hdl-cholesterol levels . the snps were analyzed as groups inherited together on the same chromosome ( haplotypes ) . one haplotype was associated with insulin sensitivity , another with insulin resistance . insulin resistance is a pathophysiological determinant of type 2 diabetes . of note , these same haplotypes were also associated with coronary artery disease , suggesting that lpl may be a genetic link between diabetes and atherosclerosis . link roundup for lpl live searches diabetes and lpl in pub med pub med central books background information cholesterol levels at the national heart , blood , and lung institute lipoprotein interconversions at the the university of manitoba type ihyperlipoproteinemia in : omimemedicine box continues on next page ... figure 1. location of lplon the human genome . lpl maps to chromosome 8 , approximately between 19,600 and 19,830 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of lpl in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 33 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of lpl may fluctuate . the live web site may , therefore , not appear exactly as in this figure.66 genetic landscape of diabetes box continued from previous page . mechanism of hydrolysis , foam cells on the bookshelf molecular biology lipoprotein lipase in entrez gene evidence . the transcription factor pparg summary an important diabetes risk factor and drug target is peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma ( ppar ) . this protein is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor super-family of transcription factors . Ppar is a key regulator of fat cell differentiation . drugs that activate ppar increase sensitivity to insulin and lower blood sugar levels in diabetics . variants of ppar influence the risk of developing obesity and type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma official gene symbol : pparg alias : ppar g1 , pparg2 background small can be powerful . some genetic risk factors may increase the risk of developing a particular disease by only a small amount . but when the genetic risk factor is common , its effects can tip the balance toward millions of people developing disease . for type 2 diabetes , one such genetic risk is the gene that encodes ppar68 genetic landscape of diabetes ( peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma ) . variants of this gene are among the first to be identified as causing a broad impact on the risk of developing type diabetes . there are three known subtypes of ppar alpha ( ) , delta ( ) , and gamma ( ) . the latter subtype , ppar , is abundant in adipose tissue and plays a key role in fat cell differentiation . Ppar is also the target of the type 2 diabetes drugs called thiazolidinediones ( tzds ) . found in the nucleus of many cells , ppars are both hormone receptors and transcription factors . ppars therefore have two binding sites , one site for ligands ( such as fatty acids , hormones , and specific diabetic drugs ) and one site for dna . to act as a transcription factor , ppar must first form a complex with another transcription factor called retinoid xreceptor ( rxr ) . when a ligand such as the drug tzd binds to the receptor ppar , it activates the ppar rxr complex . the activated complex binds to the promoter region of specific genes and activates transcription . to date , several genes have been identified as being direct targets for ppar , including lipoprotein lipase ( lpl ) , fatty acid transport protein ( fatp ) , and acetyl co a-synthase ( acs ) ( 2 ) . transcription of these genes influences the metabolism of fatty acids . tzds such as rosiglitazone can increase insulin-stimulated glucose disposal by activating the ppar rxr complex primarily in fat cells . in doing so , such drugs improve sensitivity to insulin and lower blood glucose levels in type 2 diabetes patients . molecular information nuclear receptors such as ppar are one of the largest groups of transcription factors known today . the members of this family are conserved functionally and structurally and are expressed in a wide range of multicellular ( metazoan ) species . a blast search using human pparg as a query finds proteins in 48 different species . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . the ppar gene maps to chromosome 3. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span more than 140,000 bases . there are three isoforms that differ at their 5 ends . the isoform type 2 ( ppar2 ) has an additional 84 nucleotides at its 5 end compared with the isoform type 1 and is also much less abundant than isoform 1 , its highest levels being found in adipose tissue and the colon ( 4 ) . the crystal structure of the ligand-binding domain of ppar has been solved and shares many structural features with other nuclear receptors , including a central dna binding domain and a ligand-binding domain ( lbd ) in the c-terminal half of the receptor . the lbd contains 11-13 alpha helices that fold to form a hydrophobic pocket where ligands can bind . the af2 ( activating function-2 ) helix of ppar is found here and interacts with rxr and is thought to aid dimerization and transactivation of the two receptors and also initiates transcription . crystal structures of the heterodimer of ppar and rxrin complex with their ligands ( such as rosglita zone and 9-cis-retinoic acid , respectively ) have also been solved . such structures give us a molecular understanding of how ppar is able to bind a variety of ligands and aid the design of drugs that specifically target the gamma receptor . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the pparg gene , three ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in isoform type 2 of the protein np056953 . at least one of these ( rs1801282 ) has been associated with obesity ( allelic variant .002 ) . Pparg and diabetes : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on pparg and diabetes , search pub med . genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 69 the variant of the ppar receptor inherited may affect the risk of obesity or developing type diabetes . of particular interest is position 12 of the coding region . most people have the amino acid proline here ; this confers a small risk of developing obesity , about 1.3 % . for the individual , this 1.3 % increase in risk is a small risk , but because 75 % of the population have the proline allele , this translates into a tremendous impact on the number of people developing diabetes . acommon variant of the ppar2 is a single nucleotide polymorphism ( snp ) that has alanine in the place of proline at position 12 ( pro12 ala ) . individuals who inherit this variant have a degree of protection against insulin resistance and obesity . one study screened pima indians of arizona for variations in ppar2 . type 2 diabetes is particularly common among this population . affected individuals are obese and resistant to the insulin they produce in inadequate amounts . several new snps were identified , many in the promoter region of the gene . it is not yet clear which snps are the most important in contributing to diabetes in this and in other populations . link roundup for pparg live searches diabetes and pparg in pub med pub med central books box continues on next page ... figure 1. location of pparg on the human genome . pparg maps to chromosome 3 , approximately between 12,300 and 12,450 kilobases ( kb ) . click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of pparg in the human genome . a variant of this regulatory sub-unit may interfere with the cascade of events that occurs after insulin binds to its receptor . nomenclature official gene name : phosphoinositide -- kinase , regulatory subunit , polypeptide 1 ( p85 alpha ) official gene symbol : pik3 r1 alias : grb1 , p85-alphabackground binding of insulin to its receptor triggers a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions beginning at the receptor itself ( autophosphorylation ) and specific target proteins of the receptor called insulin receptor substrates ( irss ) . the cascade of phosphorylation reactions spreads to various cellular proteins and is finally terminated when the insulin receptor is dephosphorylated . enzymes that catalyze the phosphorylation of proteins are called kinases , and one particular kinase , phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase ( pi3-k ) , is a major pathway for the metabolic effects of insulin . it plays a key role in the stimulation of glucose transport , glycogen synthesis , and fat breakdown . pi3-kis made up of a catalytic subunit and a regulatory subunit . the regulatory subunit is encoded by the p85alpha gene , which generates three protein products of 85 , 55 , and 50 k da . each of the three proteins ( p85alpha , p55alpha , and p50alpha ) are found in different tissues and may have specific roles in various tissues . the p85alpha protein is the most common protein isoform in all tissues . insulin can initiate multiple signaling pathways , and the pi3-kenzyme is important in the `` ras-independent pathway '' . after insulin binding and autophosphorylation of the receptor , irs-1 binds to a phosphorylated tyrosine residue on the receptor . the regulatory subunit of the pi3-kenzyme then binds via its src homology 2 ( sh2 ) domains to the receptor-bound irs-1 . the catalytic subunit phosphorylates specific lipids to produce a second messenger , pip3 ( phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-phosphate ) . pip3 binds to and leads to the activation of protein kinase b , which in turn promotes the metabolic effects of insulin , promoting glucose uptake ( by moving glut4 from intracellular stores to the plasma membrane ) and glycogen synthesis ( by activating glycogen kinase 3 ) . the p85alpha gene is a candidate gene for the development of diabetes because of its role in insulin signaling . the most predominant protein this gene encodes is the p85alpha protein , but the p50alpha and p55alpha proteins may also have an important role . molecular information the pik3 r1 gene maps to chromosome 5. it has 17 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 75,000 bases . alternative splicing of the p85alpha gene results in three transcript variants that encode three different protein isoforms . the longest isoform ( np852664 ) is 744 amino acids long . the regulatory subunit of pi3-kcontains two sh2 domains that bind to specific phosphorylated tyrosine residues present in motifs possessing the sequence yxxmor ymxm . these motifs are present on the insulin 72 genetic landscape of diabetes receptor and in all four of the insulin receptor substrates ( irs- , -2 , -3 , and -4 ) . for full activation of the kinase , both sh2 domains of the regulatory subunit need to bind to the motif present on irs-1 . the resulting conformational change of the regulatory subunit activates the catalytic subunit . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the pik3 r1 gene , and these variants may be involved in the development of diabetes . each of the three protein variants encoded by this gene exhibit two ( at the time of writing ) amino acid changes caused by snps in the coding region of pik3 r1 . a blast search using human pik3 r1 as a query finds proteins in 20 different species , which are all metazoans apart from five proteins found in fungi and one protein found in archaea ( single-cell organisms that are distinct from bacteria ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . amethionine to isoleucine switch at residue 326 ( m326 i ) has been observed in europeans and japanese . this change occurs just six amino acids from the n-terminal sh2 domain and appears to affect glucose homeostasis . in the danish population , the variant was common in both diabetics and healthy subjects , with homozygous carriers being less effective at glucose regulation . in the pima indians , diabetes was less common in homozygous carriers compared with individuals who were heterozygous or wild type . the m326 i variant may lead to a reduced level of protein being expressed ( but this may be offset by an observed increased interaction of the enzyme with irs-1 ) . the enzyme variant may also be less efficient in supporting the development of fat cells and in supporting insulin-stimulated glucose uptake into certain cells . overall , the m326 i variant may only have a minor impact on the signaling events initiated by the insulin . but if combined with gene variants encoding other signaling proteins or acquired alterations in protein levels , this enzyme variant may contribute to a functional impact on insulin signaling and thus contribute to the events that lead to type 2 diabetes . the vast majority of diabetes cases fall into the categories of type 1 , type 2 , and diabetes that occurs during pregnancy ( gestational diabetes ) . however , up to 5 % of cases have other specific causes and include diabetes that results from the mutation of a single gene . genetic defects of beta cell function ( mody and others ) mody maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) is an uncommon cause of diabetes that may be mistaken for type 2 diabetes because treatment of both conditions does not require insulin , at least in the early stages of the disease . however , many differences exist between mody and type 2 diabetes . whereas the nature of the genetic predispostion of type 2 diabetes is unclear with many susceptibility genes being implicated , mody is a monogenic condition ( caused by a mutation of a single gene ) that is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait . the onset of diabetes usually occurs in childhood or adolescence , usually before 25 years of age , although the hyperglycemia is mild in some cases and may be missed , as with type 2 diabetes . when hyperglycemia is detected in children , mody may be misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes . genetic studies have defined a number of subtypes of mody . mutations in the genes encoding hepatic nuclear factor 4 ( hnf4 ) , glucokinase ( gck ) , hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha and 1 beta ( commonly known as hnf1 a and hnf1 b , but official symbols are tcf1 and tcf2 , respectively ) , insulin promoter factor 1 ( ipf-1 ) , and neurod1 are the cause of the six known forms of mody ( mody 1-6 ) . see table 2 for a comparison of the mody-related genes . mody2 is caused by a mutant glucokinase enzyme that fails to accurately sense the circulating concentrations of glucose . all of the remaining mody genes encode transcription factors . hnf4 a , tcf1 , tcf2 , and ipf-1 form crucial links in the cascade of transcription factors that control the appropriate expression of beta cell genes , such as insulin and the glucose transporter glut2 . mutations of these genes may disrupt the development of beta cells in the embryo and result in dysfunctioning beta cells in the adult . however , the precise role of these proteins in adult pancreatic islets is only beginning to be unraveled . mody3 and mody2 are the most common causes of mody but remain relatively uncommon causes of diabetes . table 1. comparison between type 2 diabetes and mody . characteristic type 2 diabetes mody inheritance polygenic monogenic , autosomal dominant age of onset usually > 40 years of age usually < 25 years of age pedigree rarely seen across generations usually seen across generations penetrance variable ( 10-40 % ) 80-90 % obesity usually obese non-obese metabolic syndome1 usually present absent 1 metabolic syndrome : diabetes , insulin resistance , hypertension , and hypertriglyceridemia . comparison of mody-related genes . type of mody1 gene molecular basis mody1 hnf4 a abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion , beta cell mass , or both . mody2 glucokinase reduced phosphorylation of glucose results in a defect in sensitivity of beta cells to glucose and a defect in the storage of glucose as glycogen in the liver . mody3 tcf1 ( hnf1 a ) abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion , beta cell mass , or both . mody4 ipf1 abnormal transcriptional regulation of beta cell development and function . mody5 tcf2 ( hnf1 b ) abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion , beta cell mass , or both . mody6 neuro d1 ( beta2 ) abnormal transcriptional regulation of beta cell development and function . mody , maturity onset diabetes in the young ; hnf4 a , hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 ; tcf1 , transcription factor 1 ; hnf1 a , hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ; ipf1 , insulin promoter factor ; tcf2 , transcription factor 2 ; hnf1 b , hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ; neuro d1 , neurogenic differentiation factor ; beta2 , beta cell e-box transactivator 2. other mutations that cause diabetes by impairing beta cell function mutations in mitochondrial dnaare a rare cause of diabetes . mitochondrial dna is a circular molecule that contains 37 genes that are passed on from the mother to her offspring . paternal transmission of mitochondrial dna is thought not to occur , because after fertilization , the fertilized egg destroys mitochondria derived from the sperm . diabetes and hearing loss are associated with a point mutation of mitochondrial dna . the mutation occurs in the gene that encodes t rnaleucine , leading to the substitution of guanine for adenine ( ag ) at position 3243. the t rnaleu 3243 mutation was originally identified in patients with the melas syndrome ( mitochondrial myopathy , encephalopathy , lactic acidosis , and stroke-like syndrome ) ; however , diabetes is not part of this syndrome , suggesting that this mitochondrial mutation may be expressed as different phenotypes . the hnf4 agene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas . hnf4 ais found in a region of chromosome 20 that is linked with type 2 diabetes , and mutations of this gene cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody1 ) . nomenclature official gene name : hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha official gene symbol : hnf4 a alias : transcription factor 14 , tcf14 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 1 , mody178 genetic landscape of diabetes background the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver is regulated by the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor alpha ( hnf4 a ) . many functions that the liver carries out may appear and disappear , depending on whether hnf4 ais expressed . in addition , hnf4 a controls the expression of another transcription factor , hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 ( hnf1 a ) , which in turn regulates the expression of several important genes in the liver , including hnf4 a. as the name suggests , hnf4 ais found in abundance in the liver , but it is also found in the beta cells of the pancreas , kidneys , and intestines . together with other transcription factors such as hnf1 aand hnf1 b ( encoded by tcf1 and tcf2 , respectively ) , they make up part of a network of transcription factors that functions together to control gene expression in the developing embryo . in particular , hnf4 ais thought to play an important role in the development of the liver , kidney , and intestines . in pancreatic beta cells , this network of transcription factors regulates the expression of the insulin gene . in addition , hnf4 and hnf1 regulate the expression of several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g. , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport ( glut2 ) and glucose and mitochondrial metabolism . the hnf4 a gene is suspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes ; inheriting particular hnf4 a variants may alter insulin secretion and predispose toward hyperglycemia . mutations of hnf4 a can cause an extremely rare form of diabetes , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 1 ( mody1 ) . whereas type 2 diabetes is a disorder usually of late onset with significant polygenetic basis , mody by definition occurs in the young ( onset at age less than 25 years ) and is a monogenetic disorder inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion . molecular information hepatocyte nuclear factors ( hnfs ) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation and metabolism . hnf4 ais an orphan receptor ; the ligand ( s ) that binds to this receptor is unknown . a blast search using human hnf4 a as a query finds proteins in 47 different species , which are all multicellular species ( metazoans ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in only three species : the mouse , rat , and the nematode caenorhabditis elegans . the hnf4 agene maps to chromosome 20. it has 11 exons ( coding regions ) that span over 30,000 bases . there are at least three different transcript variants of this gene , which encode three different protein isoforms . the longest m rna transcript , nm000457 , encodes the longest hnf4 a protein ( isoform b ) , containing over 450 amino acids . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the hnf4 a gene . at the time of writing , three non-synonymous amino acid changes caused by snps have been observed in the longest protein isoform ( isoform b ) . at present , none of these snps have been associated with either type 2 diabetes or mody . mutations in the hnf4 agene resulting in mody1 are rare ; to date , only 13 families worldwide have been identified as having this form of mody . because hnf4 aregulates the expression of hnf1 a ( the cause of mody3 ) , the mechanisms that underly these forms of mody are thought to be similar.other types of diabetes 79 patients with mody1 or mody3 primarily have impaired beta cell function ( shown by a defect in glucose- induced insulin secretion ) , as opposed to a primary defect in insulin activity . patients with these forms of mody present with a mild form of diabetes with a worsening of hyperglycemia over time , leading to up to % of patients requiring insulin . these patients have the full spectrum of complications of diabetes that is seen in type 1 and type 2 diabetes . in addition to its effects on beta cell function , a deficiency of hnf4 a affects the liver . in the developing embryo , hnf4 ais needed for normal liver architecture . in the adult , a deficiency of hnf4 a affects lipid synthesis and is associated with reduced serum levels of triglycerides and lipoproteins . glucokinase , encoded by the gckgene , catalyzes the first step of glucose metabolism in the liver . it may also be an important `` glucose sensor '' in the pancreas . mutant glucokinase causes a rare autosomal dominant form of diabetes ( mody2 ) and may also play a role in type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : glucokinase official gene symbol : gck alias : gk , hexokinase 4 , hk4 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 2 , mody2 background the enzyme glucokinase catalyzes glucose metabolism in the liver and in the pancreatic beta cell . glucokinase traps glucose inside the cell by catalyzing its phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate . this is the first and rate-limiting step in glycosis , a pathway that produces energy in the form of atp from glucose . glucokinase ( also called hexokinase iv ) differs from the other hexokinases that are found in other tissues . first , glucokinase has a lower affinity for glucose . this allows other organs such as the brain and muscles to have first call on glucose when their supply is limited . A second feature is that glucokinase is not inhibited by its product , glucose-6-phosphate . this lack of negative feedback inhibition enables hepatic glucokinase to remain active while glucose is abundant , ensuring that the liver can continue removing glucose from the blood ensuring that no glucose goes to waste . glucokinase is proposed to be an important `` glucose sensor '' in the following way . the rate of glucose metabolism is determined by the rate of glucose phosphorylation , which is catalyzed by glucokinase in the liver and pancreas . the liver and pancreas also express glucose transporter-2 ( glut2 ) , an insulin-independent cellular protein that mediates the transport of glucose into cells . the capacity of glut2 to transport glucose is very high , facilitating rapid equilibrium between extracellular and intracellular glucose . thus , in effect , the extracellular glucose concentrations are sensed by glucokinase . by catalyzing the rate-limiting step of glucose metabolism in the liver , glucokinase enables the liver to buffer the rise in glucose that takes place after a meal . in the pancreas , glucokinase is the glucose sensor for insulin release . the threshold for glucose-stimulated insulin release is about 5 mmol/l . mutations of gck that alter this threshold manifest as three different syndromes and highlight the importance of gck in glucose homeostasis and diabetes : 1.activating mutations lower the beta cell threshold for insulin release to as low as 1.5 mmol/l of glucose , leading to an increase in insulin release . this manifests as persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy ( phhi ) . inactivating mutations raise the beta cell threshold for insulin release . if two alleles altered by inactivating mutations are inherited , the level of glucose needed to stimulate insulin release from the pancreas is extremely high . affected individuals present with diabetes at birth ( permanent neonatal diabetes ) .82 genetic landscape of diabetes .maturity onset diabetes in the young , type 2 ( mody2 ) is caused by inheriting one allele that has been altered by an inactivating mutation . this partial inactivation leads to an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin release to about 7 mmol/l . this causes a mild hyperglycemia that is present at birth but often is only detected in later life . molecular information the hexokinase family consists of several enzymes that are all evolutionarily related . in vertebrates , there are four hexokinases named ito iv . glucokinase is a distinct member of this family with a different kinetic profile . a blast search using human gck as a query finds proteins in 46 different species , which range from metazoa ( multicellular organisms ) , fungi , plants , and other eukaryotes . potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse , rat , fly , mosquito , nematode worm , and the plant `` mouseear cress '' . the gck gene maps to chromosome 7 . it has 12 exons ( coding regions ) that span about 46,000 bases . there are three gck transcript variants that differ in their first exons and their expression is tissue specific . one isoform predominates in the pancreatic beta cells ; the other two isoforms are found in the liver . the glucokinase enzyme is found in the outer membrane compartment of mitochondria in these tissues . gck and mody2 : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on gck and mody2 , search pub med . around 200 mutations have been identifed in the gck gene . no one mutation appears to be a common cause of mody2 , and the mutations are found throughout the gene . although mody is an uncommon cause of diabetes , mody2 is a common form of this disorder , especially in children with mild hyperglycemia and in women with gestational diabetes and a family history of diabetes . mody2 has been described in many different populations . unlike the other forms of diabetes , mody2 causes a hyperglycemia that is both mild and nonprogressive . although present from an early age , hyperglycemia is usually only picked up in adulthood during screening for other conditions and may be misdiagnosed as type 2 diabetes . mody2 can often be treated with diet alone . only 2 % of patients require insulin therapy , and complications of diabetes are rare . the tcf1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas and is important in the development of these and other organs . A mutation of tcf1 causes a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody3 ) . nomenclature official gene name : transcription factor official gene symbol : tcf1 alias : hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha , hnf1 a , hepatic nuclear factor 1 , hnf1 , albumin proximal factor , lfb1 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 3 , mody3 background tcf1 belongs to a network of transcription factors that co-ordinates the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver . in the embryo , this network of nuclear proteins guides the development of the liver and continues to be important in the adult . many functions of the liver appear and disappear , depending on the expression of these transcription factors . although found in highest amounts in the liver , this network of transcription factors is found in other organs , such as the pancreas and kidney . the transcription factor hnf4 a regulates the expression of tcf1 and may also regulate tcf2 . in pancreatic beta cells , hnf4 and tcf1 regulate the expression of the insulin gene along with several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g. , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport ( glut2 ) and glucose metabolism . because tcf2 has been found to be expressed in pancreatic islets , it has been suggested that tcf2 functions with tcf1 to regulate gene expression in beta cells . tcf1 and tcf2 share similar domains ; they have a similar dna binding region and dimerization domain . the tcf2 protein is believed to form heterodimers with tcf1 , and depending on the tcf2 isoform , the result may be to activate or inhibit transcription of target genes . mutations of hnf4 a , tcf1 , and tcf2 each cause a distinct form of maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) . mutations of hnf4 a cause mody1 , mutations of tcf1 cause mody3 , and mutations of tcf2 cause mody5 . molecular information the tcf1 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes . in the early 1980s , important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly . these master control genes lay out the body plan , and if they are mutated , the development of the fly is disrupted . these genes were called homeobox genes after `` homeotic '' , the description for a shift in structual development . homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain ( a homeodomain ) of about 60 amino acids . homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes , several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis . other types of diabetes 85 read more about homeodomains in gilbert 's developmental biology the tcf1 gene maps to chromosome . it has nine exons ( coding regions ) that span about 25,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 631 amino acids in length . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the tcf1 gene , four ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . one of these snps ( rs1169288 ) has been associated with observed cases of mody3 ( allelic variant .0011 ) . a blast search using human tcf1 as a query finds proteins in 31 different species , which are all metazoans apart from two fungi , one plant , and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . tcf1 and mody3 : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on tcf1 and mody3 , search pub med . in many populations , mutations in the tcf1 gene resulting in mody3 are the most common cause of mody . because the expression of tcf1 is regulated by hnf4 a ( the cause of mody1 ) , the mechanisms that underly these forms of mody are thought to be similar . patients with mody1 or mody3 primarily have impaired beta cell function ( shown by a defect in glucose- induced insulin secretion ) , as opposed to a primary defect in insulin activity . patients with these forms of mody present with a mild form of diabetes with a worsening of hyperglycemia over time . up to 40 % of patients require insulin , and the full spectrum of diabetes complications that are seen in type 1 and type 2 diabetes may develop . in animal models , a deficiency of the tcf1 gene causes hyperglycemia because of defective beta cell signaling , leading to defective insulin secretion . the beta cell dysfunction in mody3 may be caused by loss-of- function mechanisms , such as reduced dna binding and impaired transcriptional activation . in addition to its effects on beta cell function , a deficiency of tcf1 affects the kidneys and genital system . patients with tcf1 mutations have decreased renal reabsorption of glucose and excrete glucose in the urine ( glycosuria ) . several of the m rna transcripts encoded by the mutant hnf1 a genes are unstable , suggesting that haploinsufficiency ( deficient amounts of gene product ) of hnf1 ais responsible for the pathogenesis of mody3 . haploinsufficiency for hnf1 a may also cause diabetes that may be misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes but is not caused by an autoimmune attack ( idiopathic type 1 diabetes ) . mody4 : caused by a mutation in transcription factor ipf1 summary insulin promotor factor-1 ( ipf1 ) is responsible for the development of the pancreas in the embryo and is also a key regulator of insulin gene expression . mutations of ipf1 cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody4 ) and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : insulin promoter factor 1 official gene symbol : ipf1 alias : homeodomain transcription factor , islet/duodenum homeobox-1 , idx-1 , somatostatin transcription factor 1 , stf-1 , pancreas duodenum homeobox-1 , pdx-1 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 4 , mody488 genetic landscape of diabetes background in the developing embryo , the pancreas is formed from two buds of the primitive gut that eventually fuse together to form the pancreas gland . the exocrine part of the pancreas consists of cells that produce digestive enzymes , such as proteases and lipases , that are delivered to the gut via pancreatic ducts . the endocrine pancreas is much smaller and mainly consists of three cell types alpha , beta , and delta that produce glucagon , insulin , and somatostatin , respectively . the development of the pancreas has been well studied , and many transcription factors can be used to identify pancreatic cells at different stages of development . insulin promoter factor- ( ipf1 ) is one such transcription factor and is an early pancreatic marker that is also found in adult beta cells . at a slightly later stage in pancreas development , tcf1 is expressed and is also found in adult beta cells . in the embryo , the presence of ipf1 is vital to ensure the correct development of the pancreas . loss of both copies of the gene can cause the pancreas not to form ( pancreas agenesis ) . without ipf1 , the proliferation and differentiation of precursor cells into the endocrine and exocrine parts of the pancreas are blocked . ipf1 continues to be essential for normal pancreatic function in the adult . ipf1 regulates the expression of several pancreatic genes , most notably insulin ( ( ins ) , glucose transporter type 2 ( glut2 ) , glucokinase ( gck ) ) , and somatostatin . loss of one copy of ipf1 has been linked to mody4 and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . the dual role of ipf1 during the development of the pancreas in the embryo and as a regulator of pancreatic genes in the adult underscores the importance of ipf1 in glucose homeostasis . molecular information the ipf1 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes . in the early 1980s , important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly . these master control genes lay out the body plan , and if they are mutated , the development of the fly is disrupted . these genes were called homeobox genes after `` homeotic '' , the description for a shift in structural development . homeobox genes such as ipf1 are important in determining cell fates ; in the embryo , the presence of ipf1 ensures that pancreatic precursor cells develop into their destined mature pancreatic cells . homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain ( a homeodomain ) of about 60 amino acids . homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes , several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis . read more about homeodomains in gilbert 's developmental biology the ipf1 gene maps to chromosome 13. it has two exons ( coding regions ) that span about 6,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 283 amino acids in length . the ipf1 gene sequence is highly conserved throughout evolution . even a species that is distant in evolution from humans , such as the zebrafish , has a homeodomain that shares 95 % homology with animal ipf1 homeodomains . a blast search using human ipf1 as a query finds proteins in 47 different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular organisms ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and the plant arabidopsis thaliana ( the first plant for which the complete genome has been sequenced ) . in fact , the current understanding of mody is based on studies of a single family . in this family , an infant was born with agenesis of the pancreas that resulted in permanent neonatal diabetes and lack of pancreatic digestive enzymes . the infant was found to be homozygous for a deletion mutation in ipf1 that caused a frameshift . the resulting truncated protein did not contain the homeodomain that is essential for dna binding . family members who were heterozygous for the same mutation had a mild form of diabetes ( now called mody4 ) that was being treated with either diet alone or oral hypoglycemic agents . being heterozygous carriers for the ipf1 mutation was linked with severely impaired insulin secretion . affected family members could be traced back to six generations . compared with other forms of mody , the expression of this form of diabetes may occur at later ages . further investigations into the role of ipf1 in the developing pancreas and in the functioning of the adult pancreas will improve our understanding of how beta cell dysfunction arises and leads to diabetes . the nature of figure 1. location of ipf1 on the human genome . the ipf1 gene maps to chromosome 13 , approximately between 26,285 and 26,300 kilobases ( kb ) . click on the figure or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ipf1 in the human genome . note : this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome . because the data are recomputed between genome builds , the exact location of ipf1 may fluctuate . therefore , the live web site may not appear exactly as in this figure.90 genetic landscape of diabetes ipf1 is also important when considering how to produce functional beta cells that can be transplanted in the hope that such cells can continue secreting insulin , thus providing a cure for diabetes . mody5 : caused by a mutation in transcription factor tcf2 summary tcf2 encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas and is important in the development of these and other organs . a mutation of tcf2 causes a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes ( mody5 ) . nomenclature official gene name : transcription factor 2 official gene symbol : tcf2 alias : hepatic nuclear factor 1 beta , hnf1 b , hepatic nuclear factor 2 , hnf2 , transcription factor , liver-specific ; variant hepatic nuclear factor , vhnf1 , lfb3 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 5 , mody5 other types of diabetes 91 background tcf2 belongs to a network of transcription factors that co-ordinates the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver . in the embryo , this network of nuclear proteins guides the development of the liver and continues to be important in the adult . many functions of the liver appear and disappear , depending on the expression of these transcription factors . although found in highest amounts in the liver , this network of transcription factors is found in other organs , such as the pancreas and kidney . the transcription factor hnf4 a regulates the expression of tcf1 and may also regulate tcf2 . in pancreatic beta cells , hnf4 and tcf1 regulate the expression of the insulin gene along with several other genes linked with insulin secretion , e.g. , genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport and glucose metabolism . because tcf2 has been found to be expressed in pancreatic islets , it has been suggested that tcf2 functions with tcf1 to regulate gene expression in the beta cells . tcf1 and tcf2 share similar domains ; they have a similar dna binding region and dimerization domain . the tcf2 protein is believed to form heterodimers with tcf1 , and depending on the tcf2 isoform , the result may be to activate or inhibit transcription of target genes . mutations of hnf4 a , tcf1 , and tcf2 each cause a distinct form of maturity onset diabetes in the young ( mody ) . mutations of hnf4 a cause mody1 , mutations of tcf1 cause mody3 , and mutations of tcf2 cause mody5 . molecular information the tcf2 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes . in the early 1980s , important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly . these master control genes lay out the body plan , and if they are mutated , the development of the fly is disrupted . these genes were called homeobox genes after `` homeotic '' , the description for a shift in structural development . in the embryo , the presence of tcf2 is needed for the correct development of the kidneys and genital system . homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain ( a homeodomain ) of about 60 amino acids . homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes , several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis . read more about homeodomains in gilbert 's developmental biology the tcf2 gene maps to chromosome 17. it has nine exons ( coding regions ) that span about 60,000 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 557 amino acids in length . there are at least two transcript variants of tcf2 ; a third variant has been identified in the rat but not yet in man . transcript variant a encodes protein isoform a , which predominates in the liver and stimulates transcription . transcript variant b contains an intron that is spliced out of other variants , and as a result the encoded protein , isoform b , has a distinct cterminus . isoform b appears to be unable to stimulate transcription and instead inhibits the transactivation activity of tcf1 . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the tcf2 gene , two ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein . one of these snps ( rs1800575 ) has been associated with observed cases of mody5 ( allelic variant .0001 ) .92 genetic landscape of diabetes a blast search using human tcf2 isoform a as a query finds proteins in different species , which are all metazoans apart from two fungi and one bacterium . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat . mutations in tcf2 are associated with mody5 , severe renal defects , and genital malformations . although renal disease is a common complication of diabetes , the renal disease that is associated with tcf2 mutations and mody5 appears to be a direct result of the tcf2 mutation rather than a complication of hyperglycemia . several mutations of tcf2 have been identified , many of which involve a deletion that disrupts the dna binding domain . one such mutation was found in a norwegian family in which a deletion in exon 2 resulted in a protein that lacked amino acids arg-137 to lys-161 . affected members had mild diabetes and non-diabetic renal disease that was worsening ; both are features of mody5 . in addition , two affected female carriers of this mutation had an undeveloped vagina and uterus . this mutant tcf2 protein was unable to bind to tcf1 and could not stimulate transcription of a target gene , indicating that this was a loss-of-function mutation . A deletion mutation of tcf2 that spared the dna binding domain was found to encode a protein with increased transactivation potential , suggesting that this was a gain-of-function mutation . when both types of human mutant tcf2 were overexpressed in the embryo of the developing frog , they both interrupted the proper development of the kidney . this reflects the different types of renal disease that are seen in individuals with different types of tcf2 mutations . these findings imply that tcf2 has a central role in normal kidney development . mody6 : caused by a mutation in transcription factor neurod1 summary the transcription factor neurod1 can directly activate the transcription of the insulin gene . it is also needed in the development of the pancreas beta cells and the nervous system . mutations of this gene cause mody6 , the most recently discovered form of autosomal dominant diabetes , and may also play a role in type 1 and type 2 diabetes . nomenclature official gene name : neurogenic differentiation 1 official gene symbol : neurod1 alias : neurod , neuro d , beta2 , bhf-1 , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 6 , mody6 background the development and the normal functioning of the endocrine pancreas are dependent on a network of transcription factors . these proteins influence the transcription of genes in a negative or positive way . the neurod1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is a positive regulator for the transcription of the insulin gene . neurod1 ( for `` neurogenic differentiation '' ) is a protein that was first discovered to be important in the development of the embyronic nervous system . the expression of neurod1 stimulates neurons to mature , or differentiate , and it has the potential to convert undifferentiated cells into neurones . in animal models , mutations of the neurod1 gene disrupts the normal development of the pancreas , leading to diabetes . certain structures in the brain , such as the cerebellum and hippocampus , also fail to develop properly , resulting in seizures . the link between neurod1 and diabetes was first suggested when it was discovered that the neurod1 gene is located in the same region of a chromosome that is linked with type 1 diabetes susceptibility . this region is called iddm7 and is found on the short arm of chromosome 2. in addition to the link with type 1 diabetes , variants of neurod1 have also been linked with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes , and a mutation of neurod1 causes the most recently discovered form of autosomal dominant diabetes , maturity onset diabetes in the young type 6 ( mody6 ) . molecular information neurod1 belongs to a group of transcription factors called basic helix-loop-helix ( b hlh ) proteins . the b hlh proteins contain a conserved sequence of amino acids that binds to dna . this sequence is also known as a 96 genetic landscape of diabetes dna-binding motif , and the hlh motif consists of a short alpha helix connected by a flexible loop to a second , longer alpha helix ( see the hlh domain ) . b hlh proteins are classified into two groups based on how they bind to dna and in what tissues they are found . class a members tend to be expressed in all tissues , whereas class b members , such as neurod1 , are found only in specific tissues , mainly in the nervous system and the pancreas . b hlh proteins can function as transcription factors only when two b hlh monomers complex to form a dimer . the two-helix structure of hlh binds both to dna and to the hlh motif of a second hlh protein . the second hlh protein can be the same ( resulting in a homodimer ) or different ( resulting in a heterodimer ) , and alpha helices extending from the dimerization interface make specific contacts with dna . the neurod1 gene maps to chromosome . it has two exons ( coding regions ) that span about 4,860 bases . the gene encodes a protein of 356 amino acids . several single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) have been found within the neurod1 gene , three ( at the time of writing ) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature proteins . a blast search using human neurod1 as a query finds proteins in 24 different species , which are all metazoans ( multicellular ) . however , potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse , rat , and roundworm . neurod1 and mody6 : digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on neurod1 and mody6 , search pub med . neurod1 , after its heterodimerization with the hlh protein e37 , regulates transcription of the insulin gene . neurod1 binds to the e-box motif of the insulin gene promoter . it is proposed that deficient binding of neurod1 or binding of transcriptionally inactive neurod1 to target promoters in pancreatic islets leads to the development of diabetes . mutations in neurod1 have been found in three families to date , and these mutations are associated with type 2 diabetes and mody . in one family , a gt substitution in codon 111 caused a switch in amino acids at this position from arginine to leucine ( arg111 leu ) . the arg-111 residue is found in the dna-binding domain of neurod1 and has been evolutionarily conserved from the fruit fly to mammals and is found in all members of the hlh family of transcription factors . in this family , the arg111 leu mutation was associated with type 2 diabetes ; of the six carriers of the mutation , four were diagnosed with diabetes in their mid-40s , and two had impaired glucose tolerance . asecond family had an insertion of a cytosine residue in codon 206 ( 206+c ) , resulting in a frameshift mutation . the truncated protein that was synthesized lacked the c-terminal third of the protein , which includes the transactivation domain . of the nine carriers of the 206+cmutation , seven had diabetes . the nature of the diabetes observed in the second family was different in several ways : the diabetes was diagnosed at an earlier age and was more severe ( 2 of the 206+ccarriers required treatment with insulin ) , and the affected individuals were not obese and had low insulin levels . the early onset and severity of diabetes resemble mody rather than type 2 diabetes . thus , mutations in neurod1 are proposed to be the cause of a new subtype of mody , designated mody6 . type 2 diabetes is thought to result from a combination of environmental , behavioral , and genetic factors , with the heritability of type 2 diabetes estimated to be in the range of 25 % to 72 % based on family and twin studies . since early 2007 , genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) have led to an explosion of data for the genetics of type 2 diabetes and related traits . these gwas have occurred on the back - ground of genotyping arrays populated by common single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) , deployed in various cohorts that have coalesced to form large international consortia . as a result , a list of genetic loci that influence type 2 diabetes and quantitative glycemic traits has begun to accumulate . over 100 type 2 diabetes-associated loci have been identified , in addition to others involved in deter - mining quantitative glycemic traits , such as insulin resistance . however , no variant that is widely shared across populations has been found to have a stronger effect than the rs7903146 snp in tcf7 l2 , which itself has only a modest effect ( odds ratio 1.4 ) . nonetheless , gwasfindings have illustrated novel pathways , pointed toward fundamental biology , drawn attention to the role of beta cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes , confirmed prior epidemiologic observations , and provided possible targets for pharmacotherapy and pharma - cogenetic clinical trials . on the other hand , the causal variants have only been identified for a handful of these loci , a substantial proportion of the heritability of these phenotypes remains unexplained , and this has tempered expectations with regard to their use in clinical prediction . together , the approximately 100 loci associated with type 2 diabetes thus far explain 10 % 15 % of the genetic predisposition to the disease . limitations of early gwas included insufficient sample sizes to detect small effects , a nearly exclusive focus on populations of european descent , an imperfect capture of uncommon genetic variants , an incomplete ascertainment of alternate ( non-snp ) forms of genetic variation , and the lack of exploration of additional genetic models . as the community embraces complementary approaches that include systematic fine-mapping , custom-made replication , denser genotyping arrays , platforms that focus on functional variation , next-generation sequencing techniques , systems biology approaches , and expansion to non-european populations , the coming years will witness exponential growth in the understanding of the genetic architecture of metabolic phenotypes . whether these findings prove useful in disease prediction or therapeutic decision-making must be tested in rigorously designed clinical trials . type2 diabetes as a genetic disease the explosive parallel growth in the prevalence of the related metabolic disorders of obesity and type 2 diabetes in much of the developed and developing worlds over the past few decades is almost certainly driven by environmental and behavioral factors , since genetic components do not change in an appreciable manner over such a short time period . however , several lines of evidence suggest that variation in dna sequence does contribute to type 2 diabetes risk . first , twin studies have shown that concordance for type 2 diabetes is greater for monozygotic twins ( who share 100 % of their dna sequence ) than for dizygotic twins ( who , like siblings , share approximately 50 % of their dna sequence ) . second , the incidence of diabetes is much higher in certain racial/ethnic groups , despite an environment that is relatively comparable to that of neighboring populations . third , family history is an independent risk factor for the development of diabetes in population studies . and fourth , rare familial forms of diabetes , caused by mutations in single genes ( hence , termed monogenic or mendelian ) , prove that single base pair changes in the coding regions of key genes , which lead to alterations in protein sequence and function , are sufficient to cause hyper - glycemia in the diabetic range . consistent with this notion , the heritability of type 2 diabetes estimated in a set of scandinavian families ranges from 25 % to 69 % , and a large international meta-analysis of twin studies has reported a heritability estimate as high as 72 % . diabetes in america , 3rd edition taken together , these observations illustrate that rapid changes in the global epidemiology of type 2 diabetes are likely caused by environmental and behavioral factors overlaid on a background of genetic predisposition . this genetic predisposition may vary across populations , in some measure due to their divergent genetic history and unequal selection pressures in specific geographic regions . thus , it is well known and described else that the risk of type 2 diabetes differs in the various ethnic groups that compose the u.s. population , and the presumption is that some of these differences are genetic in nature . why is genetic exploration relevant ? regardless of whether genetic predictors become useful markers of disease onset or progression in clinical practice , the identification of genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes illuminates pathogenic mechanisms from which therapeutic windows may emerge . because germline genetic variation always predates the onset of disease , the arrow of time establishes a causal relationship that is not evident with other biologic associations . thus , the genetic approach has a unique opportunity to shed light on the pathophysiology of diabetes in its various manifestations , helping unravel its clinical heterogeneity and potentially refine therapeutic strategies . discovery of type2 diabetes genes before the sequencing of the human genome was accomplished , genetic mapping was dependent on the generation of anonymous genetic markers and their anchoring on specific locations in the genome . this task , first achieved with restriction fragment length polymorphisms and then with other markers , such as microsatellites or sequence tag sites , enabled the introduction of whole-genome linkage analysis and positional cloning , which proved extremely useful in the identification of genetic mutations that cause monogenic disease . the linkage approach , which depends on the co-segregation of a causal mutation with the anonymous marker along the lines of inheritance in pedigrees composed of affected and unaffected members , is particularly useful for traits where disease-causing alleles are highly penetrant : that is , the presence of the genetic variant virtually always co-occurs with disease , and its absence co-occurs with absence of the disease . as such , in the diabetes field , linkage analysis facilitated the discovery of the genes that underlie the various types of monogenic diabetes , such as maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) or neonatal diabetes ; these are described in detail in chapter 7 monogenic forms of diabetes . in complex diseases , where the pheno type presumably arises as a combination of several genetic variants and their interaction with the environment , successful linkage analysis is considerably more difficult . though it succeeded in demonstrating the strong influence of the human leukocyte antigen ( hla ) region on type 1 diabetes , by and large , linkage analysis did not yield reproducible positive results for type 2 diabetes . this is because in type 2 diabetes there is not a single genetic locus that exerts a very strong effect in the general population or even in individual family pedigrees . thus , the effect of genetic variation is probabilistic rather than deterministic ; a substantial proportion of people with some risk variants may be disease-free , whereas others who carry protective alleles may instead have type 2 diabetes , due to a constellation of other factors . in such situations , the amount of information provided by meioses within families , on which the power of linkage analysis depends , is greatly reduced , and the number of families required can be inordinately large . to demonstrate the effect of genetic variation on human phenotypes , an alternative approach was needed : association testing , which simply asks whether a specific allele is significantly overrepresented in diabetes cases compared to controls without diabetes , and which , with large sample size , has greater statistical power to detect a common variant of weak effect . its major limitation prior to 2005 was that only a handful of variants could be tested at a time , which required some prior biologic knowledge on the existence of such variants and the role of a given gene in diabetes pathophysiology . the discovery of millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) and their deposition in public databases ; the manufacturing of genotyping arrays that could simultaneously query hundreds of thousands of snps with great precision ; the understanding of an underlying correlation structure between snps , driven by the finite number of recombination events in human history , which reduced the complexity of the variation to be interrogated ; the recognition that the scientific imperative of reproducibility required the acceptance of strict statistical thresholds that accounted for the universe of possible hypotheses in the human genome ; and genetics of type diabetes.loci are arranged alphabetically by chromosome number . one representative variant and one or two genes are provided for each locus . loci are defined as association signals located within 500 kb of each other regardless of linkage disequilibrium . chr , chromosome . discovery of type 2 diabetes association followed detection in genome-wide association studies for quantitative glycemic traits . loci are arranged alphabetically by chromosome number . one representative variant and one or two genes are provided for each locus for each glycemic trait . loci are defined as association signals located within 500 kb of each other regardless of linkage disequilibrium . b , beta cell ( fasting glucose , homa-b , corrected insulin response , disposition index , insulinogenic index , or these traits adjusted for bmi ) ; bmi , body mass index ; chr , chromosome ; fp , fasting proinsulin ; h , hemoglobin a1c ; homa-band homa-ir , beta cell function and insulin resistance by homeostasis model assessment , respectively ; i , insulin resistance ( fasting insulin , 1-hour glucose , 2-hour glucose , homa-ir , or these traits adjusted for bmi ) . locus is also associated with type 2 diabetes . variant of inuit ancestry that is common in the greenlandic population ( frequency 17 % ) and is associated with 2-hour glucose and insulin levels . stop codon homozygotes harbor a tenfold increased risk of type 2 diabetes compared to wildtype allele carriers . definitive identification of the implicated protein allowed for functional studies : the stop codon induces lower protein levels of tbc1 d4 in human skeletal muscle , causing reduced numbers of the glucose transporter glut4 and decreased insulin-stimulated glucose uptake , leading to postprandial hyperglycemia and impaired glucose tolerance . however , many of these gwas only captured common variants , because imputation of ungenotyped variants depended on available reference panels from resources such as the hap map . the introduction of massive parallel sequencing techniques and the concomitant dramatic drop in cost allowed for efficient , high-fidelity sequencing of thousands of samples . this enabled three major developments : first , denser reference panels could be developed for more accurate imputation of less common variants ; second , targeted genotyping arrays that included less common but likely functional variation ( e.g. , coding variants ) could be designed ; and third , the allelic spectrum captured in case-control or quantitative trait studies could be expanded into less common frequencies , so that population genetics by which a rare variant may rise to prominence in a specific ethnic group could be exploited . arrays containing exome content deployed in large populations have identified coding variants in established or novel genes associated with type 2 diabetes or related quantitative traits . by detecting a robust association signal in the coding region of a specific gene ( e.g. , sgsm2 and proinsulin levels ) , these studies serve to advance the candidacy of said gene as the causal locus , from within the various possibilities under a noncoding gwas association peak . beyond genotyping , sequencing of whole exomes in europeans and mexicans has also yielded novel associations , and the extensive genetic and pedigree data available in the icelandic population have allowed whole-genome sequences in 2,630 icelanders to be extrapolated to a sample size of 11,114 type 2 diabetes cases and 267,140 controls for additional discovery . finally , whole-genome sequencing in 2,657 european individuals with and without diabetes and whole- exome sequencing in 12,940 individuals from five ancestry groups have begun to shed light on the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes in a more systematic fashion , in terms of plausible effect sizes , observed allelic frequencies , and the potential number of causal variants . all in all , these studies support a model in which type 2 diabetes is caused by hundreds or thousands of loci of modest effects , with no major role for low-frequency variants of strong effects in disease predisposition . Insights gained the tremendous success of gwas and their follow-up for type 2 diabetes and other human phenotypes have resulted in a number of insights into the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes . although the functional variants at most type 2 diabetes-associated loci are not yet known , most associated loci are located near genes that were previously unsuspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes pathophysiology . this observation highlights the complexity of the disease phenotype and the power of agnostic approaches in unearthing new knowledge . conversely , it brings to the forefront the constraints imposed by prior knowledge on scientific inquiry and points to the inadequacy of prior candidate gene selection efforts , as most logical candidate genes did not yield significant associations . this observation does not necessarily minimize the role of such biologic candidates on glucose homeostasis ; rather , it may indicate natural selections little tolerance for functional variation in those key genes . noncoding variation can affect human phenotypes . the snps with the strongest associations are often found in introns , regulatory regions , or intergenic segments , i.e. , they do not change the amino acid sequence of the encoded proteins . furthermore , for the most part , no obvious missense snp has been identified in coding regions for which the associated snp was a proxy and , thus , might have explained the association signal . the human genome is rife with regulatory sequences that influence the timing , location , and level of expression of genes , and these are thought to have a substantial impact on human biology . most genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes have modest effects . no common variant that is widely shared across populations has been found to have a stronger effect . some are either rare or unique to specific populations . moreover , pioneering whole- exome and whole-genome sequencing experiments in thousands of samples across multiple ethnic groups have failed to unveil a plethora of rare variant associations , and they have not provided support for the hypothesis that common variant association signals are undergirded by rare variants of strong effects thus , the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes appears to involve hundreds of variants with modest effects while rare variants might be found that have stronger effects in specific families or population groups , they are most likely to be private , as shared rare variants of strong effects should have been found by linkage . a corollary of this observation is that any single variant is unlikely to have significant predictive power in the individual , and even when many variants are combined into a genotype risk score ( grs ) , predictive power is poor . together , the approximately 100 loci associated with type 2 diabetes thus far explain 10 % 15 % genetics of type diabetes 147of the familial aggregation of the disease , or 5.7 % of the variance in type 2 diabetes susceptibility . the majority of genetic variants that influence type 2 diabetes risk affect beta cell function . human studies have shown that most of the identified variants ( whether causal or tagging a causal variant ) are associated with impaired beta cell function , directly or indirectly . insulin secretion appears to be more heritable than insulin resistance , confirming the pathogenic hypothesis put forth by early geneticists , by which a mostly environmental insult causing insulin resistance is overlaid on a mostly genetic predisposition to beta cell dysfunction . the genetic architecture of beta cell function and insulin action seem to differ . as mentioned , measures of estimating beta cell function in humans are more amenable to genetic approaches ( i.e. , they have a higher likelihood of yielding significant findings ) than measures of insulin sensitivity . insulin resistance might be influenced by fewer loci , less frequent variants or those with more modest effects , or a stronger environ - mental component . the genes that elevate fasting glucose in normal individuals are not necessarily the same genes that cause type 2 diabetes . while a simple model would predict that any locus that raises fasting glucose should raise risk of type 2 diabetes , the exploration of genetic determinants of glucose homeostasis in nondiabetic individuals has yielded a number of variants that do both ( i.e. , raise fasting glucose and increase type 2 diabetes risk ) , but also a non-trivial number that raise fasting glucose without appreciably increasing risk of type 2 diabetes . this observation has led physiologists to consider not just the magnitude of the glucose increase , but the manner in which this happens , as relevant to the emergence of disease . a simple elevation of the glucose set point , for example , may not necessarily lead to hyperglycemia in the diabetes range , if beta cell function is otherwise intact ; however , an alteration that leads to progressive beta cell deterioration would cause diabetes in the future . genetic studies support prior epidemiologic observations . a gwas for fasting glucose yielded significant associations near two circadian genes ( mtnr1 b and cry2 ) . a growing literature implicates circadian dysregulation , through epidemiologic reports , animal studies , and human perturbation experiments , in metabolically deleterious phenotypes . thus , a gwas for glycemia provides a potential genetic link between the two systems . similarly , a snp in adcy5 has been associated with fasting glucose , type 2 diabetes , and low birth weight , once again corroborating the known relationship between being born small for gestational age and future risk of obesity and diabetes . in addition , snps in fto and mc4 r contribute to obesity , insulin resistance , and type 2 diabetes , thus connecting various components of the metabolic syndrome . most common risk variants are shared across ethnic groups . although gwas of comparable size and power have not yet been performed in non-european populations , when investigators have tried to ascertain whether common variants that influence these traits in people of european descent also do so in individuals of other continental ancestries , by and large , they have found similar effects ; though , some loci do show heterogeneity . once allele frequency differences and altered haplotype structures are taken into account , analogous patterns of association emerge in african american , hispanic , asian , or native american populations . genetic information does not add much beyond clinical variables for type 2 diabetes prediction . commonly ascertained clinical variables are fairly precise at capturing future risk of type 2 diabetes ; thus , adding the set of common variants known to date ( which only explains a minor fraction of the genetic predisposition to type 2 diabetes ) does not seem to improve predictive accuracy at the individual level or the ability to discriminate between risk strata in a clinically meaningful way . prediction is slightly improved in younger individuals , in whom clinical risk factors are not yet fully manifest . loci initially identified in populations of european descent appear to have similar effects in other racial/ethnic groups abquintile of genetic risk score fasting glucose . an intensive lifestyle intervention is effective in people with the highest burden of known risk alleles . the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention , consisting of dietary and physical activity components , is effective even in the quartile of participants who carry the highest load of known risk variants . genetic variation may affect drug response . genetic information may eventually be used to guide medication choices in type 2 diabetes . though this is the standard of care for monogenic diabetes with examples in both mody and neonatal diabetes , the potential of genetically guided therapy is yet to be realized in common type 2 diabetes . a polymorphism in a metformin transporter may affect glycemic response to metformin , and a gwas for metformin response in people with type 2 diabetes has identified a polymorphism near the atm gene that influences metformin response in several independent cohorts , although it does not seem to exert the same effect for diabetes prevention in people with prediabetes . some sulfonylureas are metabolized by the cytochrome p450 enzyme cyp2 c9 , and patients with loss-of-function variants in this gene are at increased risk of sulfonylurea-related hypoglycemia . these early pharmacogenomic lessons suggest that genes relevant to drug response may be the same as those that increase risk for type 2 diabetes , or they may be different . limitations of current approaches ( and their solutions ) despite the overwhelming success of gwas strategies in advancing knowledge of the genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes , a number of limitations must be recognized . these limitations have been identified by the research community and are being addressed to complement gaps in understanding . gwaswere initially undertaken only in populations of european descent . a large swath of genetic variation is unique to other populations , especially those of african descent , due to the bottleneck introduced when a limited subset of human ancestors migrated out of africa . in addition , genetic variants have been identified that , though present in europeans , are much more common in other populations , thereby acquiring greater statistical power to detect modest effects . gwas efforts in east asian south asian , african american , hispanic , and native american cohorts have already yielded novel genome-wide significant findings , many of which are also seen in europeans . as larger consortia and transethnic meta-analyses are undertaken , more novel findings are expected to come to light . gwas of large cohorts suffer from relatively crude phenotyping . because sample size is paramount to achieve adequate statistical power , gwas are typically carried out in very large population cohorts where only limited phenotyping is feasible . the estimates of beta cell function or insulin sensitivity derived from simple measures , such as fasting glucose or insulin ( as opposed to those obtained from more labor-intensive and costly dynamic testing ) , are relatively imprecise . however , some of the participating cohorts do have more sophisticated phenotyping : while the partcipants have contributed their simple traits to the meta-analytic efforts , the investigators are also able to form subconsortia where additional physiologic inquiry can be carried out . this type of analysis has been performed for proinsulin levels adjusted for fasting insulin , various dynamic measures of insulin secretion , and insulin sensitivity derived from clamp studies , and it is underway for insulin sensitivity derived from oral glucose tolerance tests and insulin clearance . gwasonly capture common variants . due to the composition of genotyping arrays and statistical issues around rare observations , most gwas to date have concentrated solely on common variation ( i.e. , minor allele frequency > 5 % ) . the introduction of next-generation dna sequencing technologies has allowed for a downward expansion in the characterization of shared uncommon variation , as sequencing > 1,000 individuals from multiple ethnic groups in the 1000. an intensive lifestyle intervention , as deployed in the diabetes prevention program , is effective regardless of genetic risk score for type 2 diabetes . given the rapid progress achieved in genetic discovery in type 2 diabetes and the multipronged approach deployed to overcome experimental limitations , there is great hope that the pace will be maintained and a substantial part of the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes will be elucidated in the coming years . if this vision is realized , a number of conceptual advances can be expected . the nosology of disease will be refined . type 2 diabetes , diagnosed solely on the basis of the final common pathway of hyperglycemia , is likely a heterogeneous syndrome that can be caused by a variety of processes . genetic etiologies have already helped classify the various forms of mody and neonatal diabetes , and an analogous exercise could take place in type 2 diabetes . the categorization of the disease into subtypes based on genetic determinants of physiology , prognosis , or predisposition to complications should help stratify the patient population into groups for which therapeutic or surveillance decisions might be better tailored . novel pathways will be identified . unsuspected biology is already being uncovered via genetic discovery . with a greater number of genetic loci at hand , pathways or systems ( e.g. , cell proliferation ) can be identified , some of which may be amenable to the development of new therapeutics . genetic discovery may identify drug targets . as mentioned above , among the initial type 2 diabetes genetic associations were coding variants for pparg , the gene that encodes the target of thiazolidinedi - ones , and kcnj11/abcc8 , the genes that encode the targets for sulfonylureas . more recent studies have identified the target for glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists as another type 2 diabetes-associated gene . this proof of principle for established type 2 diabetes drug targets indicates that among the many type 2 diabetes-associated loci , there might be other genes for which a suitable drug might be found or developed . aggregating all of the genetic data in humans and model systems , as well as ancillary associations that might point to off-target effects , will be essential if the genomic revolution is to catalyze new drug discovery . stratification of patients may allow for better targeting of public health or clinical trial interventions . some preventive or therapeutic measures may be too expensive to deploy in the population at large , or they may be futile in specific subgroups . genetic characterization may help identify the groups of people more likely to benefit from particular public health strategies . similarly , the efficiency of clinical trials may be enhanced by enrolling participants who are more likely to reach the desired endpoints or benefit from the agents being tested . genetics may facilitate the implementation of precision or personalized medicine . though it is not yet clear that genetic information will be powerful enough to apply therapeutic decisions at the individual level , it may help do so for specific subgroups . for example , genetic approaches may unveil who is more likely to develop a particular diabetic complication . for such an approach to be feasible , researchers envision that in the not too distant future , any individual who joins a public or private health care system would be genotyped or sequenced for the full list of actionable genetic variants ( e.g. , those that modify risk of common diseases or response to available medications ) , such that his/her information is available in the electronic medical record . when the time comes to make specific screening or therapeutic decisions , genetic information filtered through appropriate decision support tools would automatically guide the practitioner into the course of action most appropriate to the person and situation at hand . conclusion in sum , the genetics of type 2 diabetes is in a steep discovery curve . progress has been uneven , however , with most efforts focused on common variants and populations of european descent . the rapid and continuing progress in genotyping and sequencing technologies , with a concomitant improvement in affordability , the growing understanding of the human genome , and the ongoing development of analytical tools and methods present an optimistic perspective on the future . whether this newfound knowledge will translate into improved patient care depends on the ability to design and execute genetically based and outcomes-driven clinical trials . diabetes mellitus type 2 what is it ? diabetes is a common health problem in the u.s. and the world . in diabetes , the body does not use the food it digests well . it is hard for the body to use carbohydrates and fats . the main marker of diabetes is high blood sugar ( glucose ) . your blood sugar is kept in check by insulin . insulin is a hormone that is made in the pancreas . when you get diabetes , it is related to two things : the amount of insulin your body makes how well your bodys cells use insulin . there are two different types of diabetes : type 1 and type 2. only about 5 % of people have type 1. type 1 used to be called other names ( juvenile diabetes , insulin- dependent diabetes ) . in type 1 , the pancreas does not make insulin . it usually starts as a child or teen . type 2 often starts after age 40. type 2 used to be called other names too ( adult-onset diabetes ) . obese teens can also get type 2. in type 2 , your pancreas makes insulin . but , it does not make enough insulin . or , your body can not u se the insulin as well . this often happens when you are obese . at first , your body will make more insulin to try to keep up . but , when the body can no longer keep up , diabetes comes on . type 2 often runs in families . symptoms symptoms of type 2 come from high blood sugar . they include : frequent urination extreme thirst and hunger weight loss more likely to get skin and vaginal infections infections or cuts that heal very slowly or not at all . blood sugar that is not in control can lead to coma . there are two types of comas : the form that happens in type 1 diabetes ( called ketoacidosis ) the form that happens in type 2 diabetes ( called hyperosmolar ) you may take insulin or pills to make your blood sugar go down . if your blood sugar drops too far y ou will get low blood sugar ( called hypoglycemia ) . low blood sugar has symptoms . they include : sweating trembling dizziness hunger confusion seizures loss of consciousness . blood sugar that stays high leads to long term problems from diabetes . you may not notice these problems for years . these are some : damage to the eyes ( called retinopathy ) can cause blindness . damage to the nerves ( called neuropathy ) can cause numbness , tingling and pain in your feet , legs , and arms . usually people feel it in the feet first . damage to the kidneys ( called nephropathy ) can cause your kidneys to stop working . you need your kidneys to get rid of waste products . you are also more likely to get heart disease . your heart has arteries that carry blood to the rest of your body . the trouble comes on when your arteries get narrow ( called atherosclerosis ) . then , blood does not flow well to parts of the body . this can happen in different parts of the body : heart , brain , legs . and , it leads to different problems : coronary heart disease ( heart ) cerebrovascular disease ( brain ) peripheral artery disease ( legs ) diabetes education # symptoms include : chest pain heart attack heart failure stroke leg pain when you walk or exercise that feels better when you rest . you may have trouble getting blood to your legs and feet . this can cause foot ulcers and infections . the ulcers and infection can cause tissue to die ( called gangrene ) . this in turn may lead to amputation . what your doctor looks for your doctor will look for signs of diabetes . obesity , especially around the middle ( abdominal obesity ) . this is a waist that is more than 40 inches around in men or 35 inches around in women . high blood pressure signs of eye disease on eye examination decreased feeling and reflexes in the legs poor pulses in the feet blisters , ulcers or infections of the feet abnormal heart rhythm your doctor will also do lab tests . fasting blood sugar ( this tests your blood sugar before you have had anything to eat or drink . ) hemoglobin a1c ( this test measures your average blood sugar level over the past 2 to 3 months . ) lipid profile ( this measures cholesterol , triglycerides , hdl and ldl cholesterol . it tells how likely it is that your arteries are narrowed . ) blood creatinine and urine microalbumin ( these tests look for signs of kidney disease . ) your doctor may also do an eye exam . he/she will look for early signs of eye disease . your doctor may also do a foot and ankle exam . he/she will touch your foot with a small wire . this tests whether you can feel the wire on your feet and ankles . diagnosis your doctor will use your fasting blood tests to see if you have diabetes . your blood sugar should not be more than 126 mg/dl on this test . you have diabetes if : your blood sugar is more than 126 , and you number stays high on more than one fasting test . expected duration there is no cure for diabetes . it lasts your whole life . type 2 can get much better in some obese people who lose weight and keep it off . prevention you can help prevent type 2 diabetes . you should keep your body weight within the normal range for your height . this is key if diabetes runs in your family . if you already have diabetes , its not too late . you can delay or stop later problems ( retinopathy , neuropathy , nephropathy ) . be sure to keep tight control of your blood sugar . there are ways to lower your risk of heart problems . you should not smoke . here are risk factors you can help control : high blood pressure high blood fats ( cholesterol and triglycerides ) obesity treatment and management in most people who have type 2 diabetes , treatment starts with weight . diet and exercise are used for weight loss . the diet is like ones used to lower bad fats and stop risk of heart disease . most people who have type 2 can control their blood sugar with pills at first . these include ones in the table . you may use pills for many years . but , over time , you may need insulin . or , you may need insulin right away . you should talk to your doctor about which medicine is right for you . metformin is suggested as the first one to try . diabetes education # medicine class medicine name how it works sulfonylureas repaglinide ( prandin ) nateglinide ( starlix ) increases the amount of insulin released by your pancreas biguanide metformin ( glucophage ) lowers the amount of sugar produced by the liver , helps your body use insulin better thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone ( avandia ) pioglitazone ( actos ) helps your body use insulin better alpha-glucosidase inhibitors acarbose ( precose ) delays the absorption of sugars from the intestine the pills used to treat type 2 diabetes can have many side effects . see the table for the major ones . medicine side effects sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) weight gain metformin + insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) thiazolidinedione + insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) metformin nausea and diarrhea ( less common if you take the medicine with a meal ) life threatening problems for people who already have liver or kidney disease . thiazolindinediones can affect your liver so you need to have routine blood tests acarbose extreme gas and bloating you should treat high bad cholesterol ( ldl ) . medicines that work to lower this are in the table . type of medicine medicine statins to lower ldl cholesterol lovastatin , pravastatin , simvastatin , fluvastatin , atorvastatin , rosuvastatin bile acid sequestrants to lower ldl cholesterol cholestyramine ( questran ) , colestipol ( colestid ) , colesevelam ( welchol ) new medicine to lower ldl cholesterol ezetimibe ( zetia ) medicines to lower triglycerides gemfibrozil , fenofibrate to control diabetes you should watch your diet , keep fit , and take your pills . if this is not enough , you may need to take insulin each day . you may also need to stick to a meal plan and eat meals at regular times . this will lessen your chances of having low blood sugar . test your blood sugar each day . this is a key part of managing your diabetes . this is true no matter which medicines you take . you will use a tiny needle ( called a lancet ) to get a small bit of blood . the fingertip is usually the place that is used . the testing meter will tell you how much sugar is in your blood . you should know the target ranges for your blood sugar . 90 120 mg/dl before you have had anything to eat or drink 120 180 mg/dl after meals if you know your blood sugar level you can choose types and amounts of food . you can also choose how to keep active . if your blood sugar is always diabetes education # in the target range , you are not cured . it means that you are doing a good job of managing your diabetes . you will have a better chance at a good quality of life . it is less likely that you will have long term problems from diabetes . when to call your doctor with diabetes , you are at higher risk for loss of body fluids ( dehydration ) . call the doctor if you have nausea or vomiting that lasts . follow the testing schedule your doctor gives you for sick days . this should tell you how often to test : your blood sugar your urine for ketones . call your doctor right away if : you have blood sugars that are very high ( more than 400 500 mg/dl ) . your doctor may want you to call before it gets that high . you have large amounts of ketones in your urine . have your family call the doctor right away if you show these signs : dehydration dry skin nausea vomiting confusion coma these are signs of severe high blood sugar problems ( ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar coma ) . prognosis type 2 diabetes can have a good outcome . there are things you must do to help . control your blood sugar . maintain a normal weight . reduce your risk factors for heart disease . basic genetics and molecular biology basic genetics- the laws of inheritance are investigated by genetics . the different nucleic acids ( dna and rna ) in the living organism play a central role in the inheritance of the different features . the information in the dna molecule is inherited from one generation to the next generation through reproduction . it means that the hereditary material is the dna ( in some viruses the rna ) , more exactly the genes which are the functional units which determine the nature of the features . gene definition : genes are the units of inheritance . genes are pieces of dna that contain information for synthesis of ribonucleic acids ( rnas ) or polypeptides . earlier , only those units were regarded genes , which coded proteins . nowadays , genes are also those , which code functional rnas , which are not transcribed to proteins . these are called non - coding rnas . in the so - called rna- viruses ( e.g . influenza , hiv1 ) genes are coded only in the form of rna . the appearance of an organism which results from the expression of an organism 's genes , as well as the influence of environmental factors and the interactions between the two is called phenotype . the genetic background of an organism is called genotype . the majority of the dna content of the cells is packaged in chromosomes , and dna can be also found in mitochondria . in diploid cells , a couple of homologous chromosomes are a set of one maternal chromosome and one paternal chromosome that pair up with each other inside a cell during meiosis . these copies have the same genes in the same locations , or loci . in the nature , a given gene can have different variations , these are called alleles . in a given population , the most frequent allele of a gene is called wild type . if in a diploid cell the same alleles occur in a given locus of the homologous chromosomes , then the organism is homozygous , if the alleles are different , it is heterozygous at this locus . mendelian inheritance- the founder of the modern science of genetics was johann gregor mendel . mendel 's pea plant experiments established many of the rules of heredity , now referred to as the laws of mendelian inheritance . mendel ’ s laws are law of segregation , law of independent assortment , and law of dominance . law of segregation ( the `` first law '' ) states that the two alleles for a heritable character segregate ( separate from each other ) during gamete formation and end up in different gametes . law of independent assortment ( the `` second law '' ) , also known as `` inheritance law '' , states that separate genes for separate traits are passed independently of one another from parents to offspring . law of dominance ( the `` third law '' ) states that recessive alleles will always be masked by dominant alleles . therefore , a cross between a homozygous dominant and a homozygous recessive will always express the dominant phenotype , while still having a heterozygous genotype . a mendelian trait is one that is controlled by a single locus in an inheritance pattern . in such cases , a mutation in a single gene can cause a disease that is inherited according to mendel 's laws . these diseases are called monogenic diseases . dominant - recessive inheritance in dominantly inherited diseases only one faulty gene is enough for the manifestation of the disease . such disease is e.g . familial hypercholesterolemia or huntington disease . in cases of recessive diseases , the faulty gene product is compensated by the normal variant . in this case , two mutated homologous genes are required for the manifestation of the disease . such diseases are e.g . cystic fibrosis or albinism . the codominant inheritance is a variation of the dominant - recessive inheritance . in case of codominant inheritance , two different alleles of a gene can be expressed , and each version makes a slightly different protein . both alleles influence the genetic trait or determine the characteristics of the genetic condition . e.g . blood type ab is inherited in a codominant pattern . here the a and b blood group is dominant over o blood group and show codominant inheritance to each other . it means that if a person has one gene for a blood group , one for o blood group , then his/her blood group will be a , in the case of one a and one b , the blood group will be ab . polygenic inheritance- in most cases , however , a trait or feature is determined more than one allele pair . often the genes are large in quantity , but small in effect . examples of human polygenic inheritance are height , skin color , eye color , weight and diseases like diabetes mellitus , high blood pressure , asthma , allergy , or atherosclerosis . genetic pleiotropy- it can also occur that an allele pair is responsible for more than one trait . here , the product of the gene participates in several metabolic pathways , which have effects on different organs or tissues . in this case , mutations in this gene can have different consequences . it is called genetic pleiotropy . a classic example of pleiotropy is the human disease phenylketonuria ( pku ) . this disease can cause mental retardation and reduced hair and skin pigmentation and can be caused by any of a large number of mutations in a single gene that codes for the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase , which converts the amino acid phenylalanine to tyrosine , another amino acid . sex - linked inheritance : humans have altogether 46 chromosomes , which consist of 22 pairs of autosomes in both females and males and two sex chromosomes . there are two copies of the x- chromosome in females ( homogametic ) , but males have a single x- chromosome and a y- chromosome ( heterogametic ) . genes on the x or y chromosome are called sex-linked . since humans have many more genes on the x than the y , there are many more x-linked traits than y-linked traits . the gender of the offspring is determined by the sperm . cytogenetics is a field of genetics dealing with species or cell specific number of chromosomes , and their structure and characteristic segments , their functional roles , and all the differences- namely the chromosomal mutations - related to them . with cytogenetic methods ( e.g . with chromosome staining ) the chromosome x and y can be easily differentiated . chromosome x is significantly larger than the y. both chromosomes contain homologous and non-homologous regions . the non-homologous regions contain genes which do not have pairs in the other chromosome . in males , these genes are in hemizygotic state . females possessing one x-linked recessive mutation are considered carriers and will generally not manifest clinical symptoms of the disorder . all males possessing an x-linked recessive mutation will be affected , since males have only a single x-chromosome and therefore have only one copy of x-linked genes . all offspring of a carrier female have a 50 % chance of inheriting the mutation if the father does not carry the recessive allele . all female children of an affected father will be carriers ( assuming the mother is not affected or a carrier ) , as daughters possess their father 's x-chromosome . no male children of an affected father will be affected , as males only inherit their father 's y-chromosome . because sex chromosomes contain different numbers of genes , different species of organisms have developed different mechanisms to cope with this inequality . dosage compensation is the equalization of gene expression in males and females of a species . in humans , the females ( xx ) silence the transcription of one x chromosome and transcribe all information only from the one expressed x chromosome . thus , females have the same amount of expressed x-linked genes as the human males ( xy ) who have just the one x chromosome to express from which to transcribe and express genes . the x inactivation , also called lyonization happens early in embryonic development at random . the inactive x chromosome in a female somatic cell is called a barr body . linked inheritance , recombination : if two genes are close to each other on a chromosome , then the associated traits inherited together . in this case , the mendel ’ s first and second laws are not valid , and this phenomenon is called linked inheritance , and the two genes are in linkage . in meiosis , dna replication is followed by two rounds of cell division to produce four daughter cells with half the number of chromosomes as the original parent cell . the two meiotic divisions are known as meiosis I and meiosis ii . before meiosis begins , during s phase of the cell cycle , the dna of each chromosome is replicated so that it consists of two identical sister chromatids attached at a centromere . in meiosis i , homologous chromosomes pair with each other and can exchange genetic material in a process called chromosomal crossover or crossing over or homologous recombination . during this process , the alleles of the two homologous chromosomes can exchange with each other . recombination results in a new arrangement of maternal and paternal alleles on the same chromosome . although the same genes appear in the same order , but some alleles are different . during meiosis , crossing over occurs between two homologous chromosomes . on two strands , the order of the alleles changed . mutation : mutation is a permanent alteration in the dna sequence , such that the sequence differs from what is found in most people . mutations range in size ; they can affect anywhere from a single dna building block ( base pair ) to a large segment of a chromosome that includes multiple genes . the exact cause of a given mutation is generally unknown . mutations can occur through the effect of a mutagenic agent or during the replication of the dna . during replication , on average , one mutation occurs in every 100 millionth nucleotides . the effect of the majority of mutations does not appear phenotypically , but if it occurs on a functionally important position , then the consequence can even be serious illnesses , like cancer or inherited diseases . if the mutation occurs in a gene , then it is called gene mutation . the chromosomes are fragile structures if they are mutated it is called chromosome mutation . chromosome mutation can be : duplication , deletion , translocation , inversion and insertion . basics of molecular biology : the central dogma in molecular biology can be described as `` dna makes rna and rna makes protein , '' . however , this simplification does not make it clear that the central dogma does not preclude the reverse flow of information from rna to dna , only ruling out the flow from protein to rna or dna . some characteristics of the human dna : the proteins coded by the dna in our cells determine the structures and functions of the cells . if there is a mutation in the dna , it can change the structure and function of the protein , which can have consequences on the function of the cell and can lead to diseases . the structure of the dna in our cells where the backbone of the dna strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar residues . the sugar in dna is 2-deoxyribose , which is a pentose ( five - carbon ) sugar . the sugars are joined together by phosphate groups that form phosphodiester bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings . these asymmetric bonds mean a strand of dna has a direction . in a double helix , the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand : the strands are antiparallel . the asymmetric ends of dna strands are called the 5 ’ ( five prime ) and 3 ’ ( three prime ) ends , with the 5 ’ end having a terminal phosphate group and the 3 ’ end a terminal hydroxyl group . one major difference between dna and rna is the sugar , with the 2-deoxyribose in dna being replaced by the alternative pentose sugar ribose in rna . the four bases found in dna are adenine ( abbreviated a ) , cytosine ( c ) , guanine ( g ) and thymine ( t ) . these four bases are attached to the sugar/phosphate to form the complete nucleotide , as shown for adenosine monophosphate . the nucleobases are classified into two types : the purines , a and g , being fused five- and six-membered heterocyclic compounds , and the pyrimidines , the six-membered rings c and t. a fifth pyrimidine nucleobase , uracil ( u ) , usually takes the place of thymine in rna and differs from thymine by lacking a methyl group on its ring . uracil is not usually found in dna , occurring only as a breakdown product of cytosine . in a dna double helix , each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand . this is called complementary base pairing . here , purines form hydrogen bonds to pyrimidines , with adenine bonding only to thymine in two hydrogen bonds , and cytosine bonding only to guanine in three hydrogen bonds . this arrangement of two nucleotides binding together across the double helix is called a base pair . as hydrogen bonds are not covalent , they can be broken and rejoined relatively easily . the two strands of dna in a double helix can therefore be pulled apart like a zipper , either by a mechanical force or high temperature . as a result of this complementarity , all the information in the double-stranded sequence of a dna helix is duplicated on each strand , which is vital in dna replication . indeed , this reversible and specific interaction between complementary base pairs is critical for all the functions of dna in living organisms . a dna sequence is called `` sense '' if its sequence is the same as that of a messenger rna copy that is translated into protein . the sequence on the opposite strand is called the `` antisense '' sequence . both sense and antisense sequences can exist on different parts of the same strand of dna ( i.e . both strands can contain both sense and antisense sequences ) . in human cells , dna is in two compartments . nuclear dna , or nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid ( n dna ) , is dna contained within a nucleus of the cell . nuclear dna encodes for the majority of the genome , with dna located in mitochondria coding for the rest . nuclear dna adheres to mendelian inheritance , with information coming from two parents , one male and one female . the other dna containing compartment is the mitochondria . mitochondria are cellular organelles within eukaryotic cells that convert chemical energy from food into a form that cells can use , adenosine triphosphate ( atp ) . in most multicellular organisms , including humans , the mitochondrial dna ( mt dna ) is inherited from the mother ( maternally inherited ) . nuclear dna and mitochondrial dnadiffer in many ways . the structure of nuclear dna chromosomes is linear with open ends and includes 46 chromosomes containing more than 3 billion nucleotides ( 3.38 * 10^9 ) . mitochondrial dna chromosomes have closed , circular structures , and contain 16,569 nucleotides . nuclear dna is located within the nucleus of eukaryote cells and usually has two copies per cell , while mitochondrial dna is located in the mitochondria and contains 100 to 1,000 copies per cell . nuclear dna contains more than 20 thousand protein coding and more than 23 thousand non-coding genes . the mitochondrial dna contains 37 genes . of the 37 genes , 13 are protein coding , 2 rrna and 22 trna coding genes . the mutation rate for nuclear dna is less than 0.3 % while that of mitochondrial dna is generally higher . as mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell , mutations of its dna will have an effect on the power production processes of the cell , and will have serious consequences especially in tissues with large power need , like liver , neurons and muscle . as the mutation rate in the mitochondrial dna goes higher , the mitochondrial diseases usually deteriorate with age , and can play also a role in the aging processes . replication- dna replication is the process of producing two identical replicas from one original dna molecule . this biological process occurs in all living organisms and is the basis for biological inheritance . dna is made up of two strands and each strand of the original dna molecule serves as a template for the production of the complementary strand , a process referred to as semiconservative replication . cellular proofreading and error-checking mechanisms ensure near perfect fidelity for dna replication . dna polymerases are a family of enzymes that carry out all forms of dna replication . dna polymerases add nucleotides to the 3 ' end of a strand of dna . if a mismatch is accidentally incorporated , the polymerase is inhibited from further extension . proofreading removes the mismatched nucleotide and extension continues . transcription- transcription is the first step of gene expression , in which a particular segment of dna is copied into rna ( messenger rna or mrna ) by the enzyme rna polymerase . rna polymerase , and therefore the initiation of transcription , requires the presence of a core promoter sequence in the dna . promoters are regions of dna that promote transcription and , in eukaryotes , are found at -30 , -75 , and -90 base pairs upstream from the transcription start site . transcription factors are proteins that bind to these promoter sequences and facilitate the binding of rna polymerase . one strand of the dna , the template strand ( also noncoding or antisense strand ) , is used as a template for rna synthesis . as transcription proceeds , rna polymerase traverses the template strand and uses base pairing complementarity with the dna template to create a n rna copy . although rna polymerase traverses the template str and from 3 ' 5 ' , the coding ( non - template or sense ) strand and newly formed rna can also be used as reference points , so transcription can be described as occurring 5 ' 3 ' . this produces an rna molecule from 5 ' - > 3 ' , an exact copy of the coding strand ( except that thymines are replaced with uracils , and the nucleotides are composed of a ribose ( 5-carbon ) sugar . structure of the genes the structure of a protein coding gene consists of many elements of which the actual protein coding sequence is often only a small part . these include dna regions that are not transcribed as well as untranslated regions of the rna . firstly , flanking the open reading frame , all genes contain regulatory sequence that is required for their expression . in order to be expressed , genes require a promoter sequence . the promoter is recognized and bound by transcription factors and rna polymerase to initiate transcription . additionally , genes can have regulatory regions many kilobases upstream or downstream of the open reading frame . these act by binding to transcription factors which then cause the dna to loop so that the regulatory sequence ( and bound transcription factor ) become close to the rna polymerase binding site . for example , enhancers increase transcription by binding an activator protein which then helps to recruit the rna polymerase to the promoter ; conversely , silencers bind repressor proteins and make the dna less available for rna polymerase . the transcribed pre-mrna contains untranslated regions at both ends which contain a ribosome binding site , terminator and start and stop codons . in addition , most eukaryotic open reading frames contain untranslated introns which are removed before the exons are translated . the sequences at the ends of the introns , dictate the splice sites to generate the final mature mrna which encodes the protein or rna product . splicing is a modification of the nascent pre-mrna transcript in which introns are removed and exons are joined . for nuclear encoded genes , splicing takes place within the nucleus after or concurrently with transcription . alternative splicing is a regulated process during gene expression that results in a single gene coding for multiple proteins . in this process , particular exons of a gene may be included within or excluded from the final , processed messenger rna ( mrna ) produced from that gene . consequently , the proteins translated from alternatively spliced mrnas will contain differences in their amino acid sequence and , often , in their biological functions . notably , alternative splicing allows the human genome to direct the synthesis of many more proteins than would be expected from its 20,000 protein - coding genes . alternative splicing . because of this process , one gene can code for several proteins . the genetic code is the set of rules by which information encoded within genetic material ( dna or mrna sequences ) is translated into proteins by living cells . biological decoding is accomplished by the ribosome , which links amino acids in an order specified by mrna , using transfer rna ( trna ) molecules to carry amino acids and to read the mrna three nucleotides at a time . the genetic code is highly similar among all organisms and can be expressed in a simple table with 64 entries . the code defines how sequences of these nucleotide triplets , called codons , specify which amino acid will be added next during protein synthesis . with some exceptions , a three-nucleotide codon in a nucleic acid sequence specifies a single amino acid . because the vast majority of genes are encoded with exactly the same code , this particular code is often referred to as the canonical or standard genetic code , or simply the genetic code , though in fact some variant codes have evolved . for example , protein synthesis in human mitochondria relies on a genetic code that differs from the standard genetic code . translation starts with a chain initiation codon or start codon . the most common start codon is aug , which is read as methionine . the three stop codons have been given names : uag is amber , uga is opal ( sometimes also called umber ) , and uaa is ochre . stop codons are also called `` termination '' or `` nonsense '' codons . they signal release of the nascent polypeptide from the ribosome because there is no cognate trna that has anticodons complementary to these stop signals , and so a release factor binds to the ribosome instead . degeneracy is the redundancy of the genetic code . the genetic code has redundancy but no ambiguity . for example , although codons gaa and gag both specify glutamic acid ( redundancy ) , neither of them specifies any other amino acid ( no ambiguity ) . translation : in translation , mrna is decoded by a ribosome to produce a specific amino acid chain , or polypeptide . the polypeptide later folds into an active protein and performs its functions in the cell . the ribosome facilitates decoding by inducing the binding of complementary transfer rna ( trna ) anticodon sequences to mrna codons . the trnas carry specific amino acids that are chained together into a polypeptide as the m rna passes through and is `` read '' by the ribosome . the entire process is a part of gene expression . after the translation , some proteins are modified through a process called post-translational modification . post-translational modification refers to the covalent and generally enzymatic modification of proteins during or after protein biosynthesis . post-translational modifications can occur on the amino acid side chains or at the protein 's c- or n- termini . they can extend the chemical repertoire of the 20 standard amino acids by introducing new functional groups such as phosphate , acetate , amide groups , or methyl groups . other forms of post-translational modification consist of cleaving peptide bonds , as in processing a propeptide to a mature form or removing the initiator methionine residue . the formation of disulfide bonds from cysteine residues may also be referred to as a post-translational modification . for instance , the peptide hormone insulin is cut twice after disulfide bonds are formed , and a propeptide is removed from the middle of the chain ; the resulting protein consists of two polypeptide chains connected by disulfide bonds . transmission of genetic information- cell cycle and regulation of cell cycle- in a given organism the genetic information ( dna ) is transferred from cell to cell during the cell cycle . in the cell cycle , the cellular content is duplicated then it is halved . however , a distinction must be drawn between the nuclear and cytoplasmic events . dna duplication ( in chromatin form of dna ) and halving ( in chromosome form of dna ) are very precisely regulated processes , resulting two genetically identical cells . at the same time , the growing of the cytoplasm followed by division in two are less strictly regulated events of cell cycle . the duplication of cellular ingredients occurs in interphase , that is divided into g1 ( preduplication or preceding dna duplication ) , s ( dna synthesis ) and g2 ( postduplication ) phases . in m-phase the previously duplicated cellular content is separated , in mitosis the chromosomes , followed by cytokinesis , the division of cytoplasm . cell proliferation rate in an adult multicellular organism is variable . moreover , most of the cells are in so-called g0 phase , where there is no cell division , sometimes not even growth . the cells need extracellular stimuli , e.g . growth factors and/or adhesion to other cells or extracellular matrix in order to reenter g1 phase . in the cell cycle a very sophisticated control system ( cell cycle control system ) functions , whose essential components are the cyclin-dependent protein kinases , the cdk-s. cdk-s are activated by another protein family , by cyclins , the amount of which cyclically varies during the cell cycle . beside cyclins , the activity of cyclin- dependent kinases is regulated by other factors , too . these factors include activating and inhibiting cdk kinases which phosphorylate cdk-s , resulting cdk activation and inhibition , respectively . phosphate residues are removed by phosphatases , modifying cdk activity . according to their names , cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors inhibit cdk activity . the amount of all the proteins mentioned before may be regulated via transcriptional and translational level and by proteasomal degradation , followed by ubiquitination . all these together allow a highly organized , complex but gentle control of the cell cycle . the cyclin-dependent kinases , the main actors of cell cycle control system , operate the cell cycle through phosphorylation of many different target proteins . recently , in addition to cyclin-dependent kinases , the role of some other kinases ( e.g . polo , aurora etc . ) was found . the phases of cell cycle are not interchangeable , they have to follow each other in a strict order . operation of checkpoints in the cell cycle ensures to give rise to genetically identical cells by cell cycle . phases ( g1 , s , g2 , m ) and checkpoints ( g1 , g2 , m ) of cell cycle . cell cycle control system allows to overstep checkpoints if the conditions are suitable for the cell to proceed to the next phase . the main checkpoints are the following : g1 checkpoint ( in higher eukaryotes it is referred to as restriction point ) , where first of all the integrity of dna is checked , operates at the end of the g1 phase . the second checkpoint is at the end of g2 phase , it is the g2 checkpoint , where the accuracy and integrity of dna is monitored . finally , the function of m checkpoint , in the metaphase of mitosis is to ensure the appropriate attachment of all chromosomes to the microtubules of the mitotic spindle before the duplicated chromosomes are separated . multicellular ( mammalian ) cell cycle and the regulation . g0-g1 transition : in an adult multicellular organism most cells do not divide , they are found in a special phase , g0 phase . g0 phase cells lack functional cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases , the main cell cycle regulators . if proliferation is necessary , these g0 phase cells have to return into the cell cycle , essentially have to pass g1 checkpoint or restriction point . it is induced by growth factors or extracellular matrix components initiating transcription and translation of d cyclin and reduction of cdk inhibitors by stimulating their proteasomal degradation . these cdk inhibitors : p16 , p1 5 , p18 and p19 specifically inhibit cdk4 and cdk6 by preventing the binding of activating d cyclin , and also the activity of cdk-cyclin complex . the main target of active cdk4/6-d cyclin complex is prb ( rb stands for retinoblastoma , a malignant disease of the retina caused by the mutation of prb encoding gene ) , p107 and p130 proteins . the phosphorylation of these proteins causes conformational changes , and they release e2f transcription factors . and it is the turning point in g0-g1 transition , because e2f transcription factors induce the transcription of several s-phase specific genes , such as e cyclin , a cyclin , thymidine kinase , dna polymerase etc . e cyclin activates cdk2 whose main target , similarly to the cdk4/6-d-cyclin is rb protein , the phosphorylation of which is enhanced ( positive feedback ) . cdk2 has another activator , a cyclin , their complex is essential in s phase initiation . disadvantageous environmental effects , e.g . hypoxia ( excessive proliferation of cells may result not sufficient blood flow ) or dna damages activate g1 checkpoint machinery and it will stop the cell cycle . the amount and activity of p53 is increased which in turn induces the transcription of a cdk inhibitor protein , p21 . p21 is a general cdk inhibitor , hence it inhibits all cdk-cyclin complexes : cdk4/6 – d cyclin , cdk2 – e cyclin and cdk2 – a cyclin , so the cell cycle is halted and the cell may not enter s phase . this general cdk inhibitor family has two other members , p27 and p57 . these proteins prevent the duplication of damaged dna , suspend the cell cycle , allowing error correction . briefly , their activity prevents the cell cycle resulting genetically different cells . summary of g0-g1 transition : the cdk inhibitor encoding genes are tumor suppressor genes whose mutations in homozygote form ( recessive ) are the main contributors of tumor development . the most well-known tumor suppressor gene species are p53 and prb encoding genes . about half of the tumors lack functional p53 . the genes encoding cell cycle stimulating proteins ( cdk-s , cyclins , growth factors and many others ) are protooncogenes . their mutation in heterozygote form ( dominant ) is also involved in tumor development . g1-s transition , s-phase : the main s phase event is the dna duplication , the replication . since eukaryotic cell dna is much higher than prokaryotic , the replication starts simultaneously at several sites , called origos , and occurs in both directions . initiation proteins associate with origos where dna unwinds , followed by the attachment of further components of replication complex . as throughout the whole cell cycle cyclin-dependent kinases play major role in g1-s transition , too . cdk2-e cyclin complex activation requires the degradation of the cdk inhibitor p27 , which step is initiated by an ubiquitin ligase , scf ( skp-cullin-f-box protein ) . finally , the activated cdk2 ( and another protein kinase , cdc7 ) phosphorylate some , not exactly known members of the replication complex . this effect fulfills another role , too , namely it prevents the formation or the binding of new initiation complexes , and hence , the dna is replicated only once . in dna replication , both strands of dna serve as template , and appropriate nucleotides built in according to the complementarity of the nucleotide chain . as it was demonstrated by the experiments applying radioactive isotope labelled monomers , dna synthesis is semi-conservative , since after the replication both dna molecules have one old and a newly synthesized strand . since the sequence of dna strand unambiguously determines the sequence of complementer dna strand , the arising two dna molecules are equal . g2-m transition : the regulation of g2-m transition is better known than that of g1-s transition . the m-phase is triggered by mpf ( m-phase or mitosis promoting factor ) , that is a complex of b cyclin and cdk1 . after the binding of these proteins , post-translational modifications are required for the final activation . cdk1 component of the complex is the substrate of two kinases , one is an activating kinase which adds a phosphate group to a tyrosine , the other is an inactivating kinase which phosphorylates a threonine residue of the protein . the latter is removed by a phosphatase ( product of a gene belonging to cdc25 gene family ) , and this is the last step in mpf activation . but all these events will only happen if g2 checkpoint machinery finds dna undamaged and correctly replicated . mpf activation . b cyclin binds to cdk1 which is phosphorylated by an activating and an inactivating kinase . inactivating phosphate group is cleaved by a phosphatase resulting an active mpf . mpf has numerous substrates , first of all it activates cdc25 protein , thus by a positive feedback control more and more mpf is activated . in mammalian cells there are three phosphatases : cdc25 a , b , and c , at this point of cell cycle regulation , the c type operates . then , mpf triggers m-phase through the phosphorylation of further target proteins , like lamin a , b , and c , components of nuclear lamin a , a structure attached to the inner nuclear membrane . it results disintegration of nuclear membrane . mpf indirectly inhibits actomyosin atp-ase activity causing rearrangement of microfilaments and consequently rounding of the cell and also inhibiting premature cytokinesis . one of the major events , the chromosome condensation is triggered also by mpf , through the phosphorylation of condensins , h1 and h3 histones . phosphorylation of map-s ( microtubules associated proteins ) changes the arrangement of microtubule system and induces mitotic spindle formation needed for chromosome separation . in g2-m phase transition the apc ( anaphase promoting complex ) having role later in metaphase-anaphase transition is indirectly activated by mpf . m-phase : the m-phase is a complex process of successive steps , a series of events , used to be divided into mitosis and cytokinesis . in the first half of the m-phase , in mitosis , the doubled dna divides in two , followed by the separation of cytoplasm , by the phase of cytokinesis . in mitosis the following phases are distinguished : prophase- in the nucleus the nuclear chromatin gradually changes to chromosomes by the maximal condensation of dna . since before the m-phase the dna has been replicated , each chromosome comprises two chromatids ( sister chromatids ) . in the cytoplasm the centrosome , which also has been doubled in interphase , splits into two and move to opposite poles of the cell , and organize the mitotic spindle composed of microtubules . prometaphase- nucleolus disappears , the chromosome development continues . the nuclear membrane disintegrates , too . kinetochore microtubules binding kinetochore protein complex associate to the centromere region of each chromatid . metaphase- the chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane of the cell by the help of kinetochore microtubules . kinetochore regions face the two poles of the cell , and the kinetochore microtubules bind to sister chromatids of a chromosome from opposite direction . anaphase- sister chromatids of chromosomes split and move toward the poles of the cell . in the first half of anaphase ( anaphase a ) , the kinetochore , later in the second half of anaphase ( anaphase b ) , the polar microtubules operate . it is the shortest phase of mitosis . telophase- kinetochore microtubules disappear , nuclear membrane is reorganized around the chromatids at the cell poles . chromosomes decondense , they become chromatin . nucleoli are reformed . polar microtubules lengthen further the cell . the mitosis , the division of nuclear content is followed by : cytokinesis- the separation of the cytoplasm begins in the late anaphase and is completed after the telophase . in the middle of the cell , perpendicular to the axis of the mitotic spindle cleavage furrow appears which gradually deepens and thus the connection between the two half cells narrows . the overlapping region of polar microtubules makes so-called midbody . finally , the cytoplasm completely splits . chromosome structure : in m-phase , the long eukaryotic dna molecules have to be packed in small chromosomes to be able to accurately halve without breaks . meanwhile , the original length of the dna ( several cm ) is reduced by ten thousands fold ( few m ) . the molecular mechanism of this packaging is still not known in detail . two nm wide dna double helix wraps the octamers of histones ( 2 of each h2a , h2b , h3 and h4 histone molecules ) forming nucleosomes , disc-like structures connected by the continuous dna molecule . it is called nucleosomal structure having a diameter of 11 nm . h1 histone folds six nucleosomes in one plane to give a diameter of 30 nm fiber called chromatin or solenoid . the chromatin fiber is attached to a protein scaffold and forms loops . these loops are the basic unit of replication and transcription , and this structure is 300 nm wide . finally , it is further compressed and folded to produce the chromatids of 1400 nm wide metaphase chromosome . the final step of chromosome condensation is induced by the mpf activated condensins . there are two protein complexes of similar structure influencing different dna functions : the condensins and the cohesins . they are composed of different smc ( structural maintenance of chromosomes ) proteins having atpase activity and regulatory functions , all associate in a ring-like structure . metaphase chromosome has very characteristic morphological structure . as the dna is doubled in the s phase , chromosome comprises two sister chromatids . after dna synthesis , the dna molecules are held together by the ring-like cohesin complexes . much of this cohesins detaches during the prophase , and at the end of metaphase , it is found only at the primary constriction of chromosomes specified as centromere region . this peri-centromeric cohesin is cleaved in early anaphase allowing the separation of chromatids . chromosomes are usually classified according to the location of the centromere region . during prophase and prometaphase , a special three-layer plate of protein structure called kinetochore associates to the centromeres of chromosomes . beside many other proteins , kinetochore contains both dynein and kinesin-type motor proteins , and the role of it is to bind kinetochore microtubules ( about 30 40/sister chromatids ) . in scleroderma , which is an autoimmune disease , patients produce antibodies against some of the kinetochore proteins . the centromere divides the sister chromatids into two arms , the ends of the arms are called telomeres . loss of telomeres makes the chromosomes instable . there are 5 pairs of human chromosomes having not only primary , but secondary constriction or nor ( nucleolar organizer region ) too , which contains a high number of copies of the large ( 45s ) rrna gene . disappearance and re-formation of nuclear envelope : as it was mentioned before , the lamins of nuclear lamina attached to the inner surface of nuclear envelope are phosphorylated by mpf , causing the dissociation of nuclear membrane into vesicles . lamin b remains in the membrane of vesicles , but lamin a and c are found in soluble form in the cytoplasm . the highly organized nuclear pores are also decomposed . at the end of mitosis , in the telophase , the phosphatases are activated and dephosphorylate the lamins . the reformation of nuclear envelope begins on the surface of chromosomes . they move closer to each other , and the membranes fuse and the pores are also reorganized . finally , the chromosomes decondense to chromatin . structure and role of mitotic spindle : the components of mitotic spindle are the centrosomes and the microtubules . in human cells , the major microtubule organizer center ( mtoc ) is the centrosome ; in interphase cells , it is located usually near to the nucleus . the structure of centrosome is the following : in the center , there are two perpendicular cylindrical bodies ( the centrioles ) , which are connected by proteins at their bases . the centrioles are made of 9x3 microtubules in windmill-like arrangement . around them , an amorphous , unstructured material , the pericentriolar matrix is located , in which numerous different proteins are found . the microtubules grow out from the pericentriolar matrix in star-like manner , this region is called aster . minus ends of microtubules face the centrioles , their plus ends face outward . the microtubules are organized , the tubulin heterodimer polymerization is induced by a special subtype of tubulin , found in- tubulin rings in the pericentriolar matrix . schematic figure of centrosome : there are two centrioles in the center , surrounded by pericentriolar matrix ( pcm ) which is the nucleation site of microtubules ( yturc=y tubulin ring complex ) . to produce genetically identical cells through the cell cycle not only the accurate replication and separation of dna , but the precise duplication and division of centrosome are needed . if there is no centrosome duplication , there is no bipolar mitotic spindle , no division and the chromosomes are not able to separate in two . however , if centrosome is repeatedly duplicated , more poles are made in the cells and the chromosomes are unevenly distributed between the daughter cells . in late g1 phase , the centrioles slightly move away from each other , and in the s-phase , perpendicularly to the original one the development of new centrioles begin . in late g2 and early mitosis . the two pairs of centrioles are separated from each other , migrate to the two poles of the cell by the help of microtubule system and motor proteins . at the poles , the new centrosomes nucleate the microtubules of mitotic spindle . mitotic spindle organization also needs the activation of mpf . at the beginning of division , the map-s microtubule associated proteins are phosphorylated by mpf , which in turn changes the characteristic interphase microtubule arrangement and induces the development of mitotic spindle . in interphase , there are few , long , and relatively stable microtubules . oppositely , the mitotic spindle is characterized by many , short and highly dynamic microtubules . in prophase , many dynamic microtubules grow in all directions back away from the centrosomes . the attachment to any structure by their + end stabilizes the microtubules . the microtubules growing from different poles may bind to each other giving rise to the partly overlapping polar microtubules . in the overlapping region + end motor proteins are found , which stabilize the polar microtubules and are also needed to push apart the two poles in anaphase b. in prometaphase , after the disruption of nuclear envelope the microtubules randomly may bind not only to each other , but also to the chromosomes . it has been demonstrated that the chromosomes by their kinetochore region move on the microtubules . this movement is a kind of sliding mediated by dynein motor protein . around the centrosome , the effect of a special unidentified force , referred as polar wind is noticed . it means that from the poles of the cell , all bigger particles are excluded , probably due to the mechanical effect of intensively growing microtubules . as they grow , they may push any particles , e.g . chromosomes . at the same time , the + ends of microtubules randomly growing from the two opposite poles may bind to the two different kinetochores of chromosomes . these microtubules are the kinetochore microtubules . in the metaphase , the chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane by the help of kinetochore microtubules . this arrangement is not static , the chromosomes are oscillating according to the dynamism of microtubules . at the same time , the length of microtubules is constant , because the rate of polymerization on both ends is the same . the third type of microtubules are the astral ones , they grow from the centrosome toward the plasma membrane . the role of them is not clear . metaphase-anaphase transition : in metaphase-anaphase transition , the anaphase promoting complex ( apc ) has to be activated . apc is a specific ubiquitin ligase , an enzyme which binds ubiquitin to its substrate proteins , targeting them to proteasomal degradation . one of the main substrates is the separase inhibitor , the securin . destruction of securin activates separase , which in turn , cleaves the sister chromatid binding cohesin from the chromosomes , allowing the pulling of sister chromatids to the poles by kinetochor microtubules . the other substrate is the b cyclin , and its degradation inactivates mpf . inactivation of mpf triggers the completion of m-phase ; disappearance of mitotic spindle , chromosome decondensation , reorganization of nuclear envelope and the cytokinesis , too . in the metaphase m ( spindle ) -checkpoint machinery operates ; briefly , its significance is to ensure the precise halving of chromosomes , pulling one sister chromatid to one pole and the other one to the other pole . the accurate segregation of sister chromatids is ensured by amphitelic attachment . if the attachment is not correct , the kinetochore microtubules are not bound to the sister chromatids of a chromosome from opposite poles , there are free kinetochores , the apc remains inactive and the mitosis is stopped in metaphase until the attachment is corrected . the colchicine causing disruption of microtubules stops the division in this way . if the chromosomes are arranged correctly in the metaphase , apc is activated and the cell may step the anaphase . in anaphase , two subphases are distinguished according to the type of microtubules operating . in anaphase a , the kinetochore microtubules shorten by depolymerization on both ends . the depolymerization is coupled to the movement of the chromosome , the sister chromatids are pulled to the opposite poles of the cell . the poles are further separated in anaphase b by the help of polar microtubules which are growing , but the overlapping region remains constant . consequently , the sister chromatids are further separated . cytokinesis : the division of cytoplasm is carried out by other components of the cytoskeleton than the separation of chromosomes , but the two cytoskeletal systems are not independent . the site of cytoplasmic cleavage is denoted by the mitotic spindle . asymmetric positioned mitotic spindle results in asymmetric cytokinesis , in different sized cells . in late anaphase ( anaphase b ) , after the migration of two sister chromatids to the poles beneath the plasma membrane , perpendicularly to the mitotic spindle axis , a contractile ring composed of actin and myosin ii filaments is formed . the regulation of contractile ring development is not exactly known , but the role of kinases and monomeric g-proteins is suspected . the sliding of actin and myosin filaments on each other eventually leads to the progressive cleavage of the cell . finally , below the contractile ring , the two cells are only connected by the so-called midbody . the new cell membranes develop by the fusion of vesicles , which transport probably takes place along the microtubules of midbody . operation of cell cycle checkpoints : the checkpoint machinery is composed of three main components which make up a cascade . the sensor detects the errors occurring in dna molecules , this signal is transmitted to a transducer , which finally triggers effector proteins . in g1 and g2 checkpoints , the dnadamages , for example the single-stranded dna , or double strand breaks are recognized by certain proteins which activate transducers . the activated transducers , which are protein kinases ( not cyclin dependent ) phosphorylate , e.g . in g1 checkpoint , the p53 protein . this phosphorylation stabilizes p53 and stops the cell cycle . so , in g1 checkpoint , the effector protein is p53 . in g2 checkpoint , cdc25 is the effector molecule . in the case of dna damage , the transducer inactivates cdc25 by phosphorylation , that is why the inactive cdc25 is not able to activate mpf by the cleavage of inactivation phosphate group , so the cell cycle is stopped before m-phase . in the m checkpoint , the sensor proteins bind to free kinetochores of chromosomes . however , these proteins recruit a protein which is required for the apc function , so in the case of free kinetochores apc is not functional ; the cell is retained in metaphase . obviously , the precise operation of checkpoint machinery is more complex than it has been described before ; the details are being discovered nowadays . anyway , its accurate function is essential to give rise to genetically identical cell by cell cycle . the failure of sufficient regulation or checkpoint machinery may result in atypical divisions . although some of these atypical divisions , depending on the species and cell type is not necessarily abnormal , but the majority of them is characteristic of tumor cells . of course , from each of atypical proliferation genetically diverse cells are originated . in endomitosis , the nuclear envelope remains intact , therefore , the amount of cellular dna content increases . in parallel with the size of the nucleus and the whole cell enlarges , too , so giant cells are formed . the sister chromatid separation inside the intact nuclear causes the increase in chromosome number of the cell , these are referred to as polyploid cells . if sister chromatids remain together , it leads to the formation of giant chromosomes ( polytene ) composed of many sister chromatids instead of two . failure of cytokinesis results in giant cells , too , but these cells have more nuclei . many division abnormalities are caused by the mitotic spindle defects . the normal division is bipolar due to the precise duplication and separation of centrosomes . abnormalities either in the duplication or the separation of centrosomes may cause so-called multipolar divisions , depending on the number of poles : tri- , tetra- , etc . polar divisions . the consequence of non-disjunction of sister chromatids of a chromosome can be easily calculated , it leads to the change of chromosome number ( aneuploidy ) in both cells , in one of them one more and in the other one less chromosome is found . the reason for such a defect is the syntelic or monotelic kinetochore - microtubule attachment . however , the merotelic attachment may result in bridge formation ( or anaphase bridge because it becomes visible in anaphase ) . first , the sister chromatid to which microtubules bind from both poles make a kind of bridge but later it more probably breaks . the breakage of chromosomes leads to structural chromosomal abnormalities . the chromosome fragment without centromere is excluded from the nucleus and makes a so-called micronucleus in the cytoplasm . this phenomenon is used in mutagenicity assays to detect compounds which cause/increase chromosomal breakages . chromosome territories : while chromosomes appear as condensed , elongated structures during the process of cell division , for most of the lifetime of a cell , chromosomes do not look anything like this . so , the question is what chromosomes look like in the nucleus of a cell between cell divisions ? it was the fish technique that has revealed how chromosomes look like during the interphase of the cell cycle . it turned out that among the several models suggested previously , the chromosome territory model proved to be the right one . although there are still a lot of open questions a few topics have already been clarified : chromosome territories are irregular in shape but typically about 1 to 2 micrometers in diameter , and they consist of smaller subdomains . chromosome territories border each other closely ; the neighboring chromosomes can invade the territories of each other and intermingle at their peripheries . chromosome territories are known to be arranged radially around the nucleus . chromosome territories are semiconserved from parent to daughter cell during cell division , with locations in the daughter cell similar to those in the parent cell . patterns of chromosome arrangement are specific to both cell type and tissue type . the organization of interphase chromosome territories changes during differentiation , quiescence , and senescence . the gene - rich chromosomes are present in the nuclear interior while gene - poor chromosomes are located at the periphery . regions of dna that are within the nuclear interior show higher transcriptional activity . group of genes with common tasks are in the vicinity of each other and are under coordinated regulation . loops may carry genes to even very remote sites in the nuclear space for coregulation in an expression hub . chromosome territories are also dynamic structures , with genes able to relocate from the periphery towards the interior once they have been switched on . in other cases , genes may move in the opposite direction , or simply maintain their position . chromosome territories can reposition in diseases , which might provide novel insights into disease mechanisms and why genes are incorrectly expressed in diseases . in summary , this functional compartmentalization of the chromosomes makes possible : coordinated functioning of the dna packed in the nucleus ; synchronized switching off and on of hundreds/thousands of genes coordinated functioning of genes working for common aims fine-tuning of the regulation of gene-gene interactions organized transportation of gene products separation of active genes from the inactive ones . inter- and intrachromosomal loops in the regulation of gene expression : loops may carry genes to remote sites in the nuclear space for coregulation in an expression hub . meiosis : there are two forms of genetic information transmission from one generation to the next one . firstly , asexual reproduction , which is typical for the lower organisms evolved . it is a simple process , the offspring develop from the somatic cells of a single parent , thus they are genetically identical to the parent organism . in sexual reproduction , the offspring have mixed genome of two parents , so they are genetically different from both parents and from each other . sexual reproduction has a great evolutionary advantage for the species , because the individuals gain high genetic variability allowing the adaptation to the unexpected circumstances . sexual reproduction is crucial for the survival of species . in sexually reproducing organisms , there are two successive generations of cells : the diploid somatic cells give rise to haploid cell by meiosis and the haploid cells , which are reduced to gametes in animals . the species-specific chromosome number is restored by the fusion of gametes resulting diploid zygote , and the life of a new individual starts . how these haploid cells are formed in meiosis ? the essence of the process is double : on one hand the chromosome number is halved , secondly the parental genetic information is mixed . phases of meiosis : in meiosis there are two successive divisions : meiosis I and meiosis ii . similarly to mitosis , in meiosis i , prophase the chromosomes are condensed , the nucleolus and the nuclear envelope disappear . the main event of this phase is the homologous recombination , the exchange of sequences of paired homologous chromosomes ( maternal and paternal chromosomes of the same size and shape and having the same genes ) . it is the longest phase of meiosis which is divided into five substages : leptotene , zygotene , pachytene , diplotene and diakinesis . in leptotene , the two sister chromatids ( having identical dna due to duplication in s-phase ) containing chromosomes are very thin fiber-like structures , which randomly bind by their both ends to the nuclear envelope . later , they move to a distinct point of nuclear envelope , close to centrosome , forming a bouquet-like structure . thus , the homologous chromosomes are close to each other , which is necessary for the next stage process . in zygotene , the pairing , also known as synapse , of homologous chromosomes begins . recent studies have shown that even before the pairing , probably in early leptotene the double stranded dna-s break at several hundred sites . the pairing of homologous chromosomes is helped by a ladder-like protein structure , by the synaptonemal complex . it has lateral , transversal filaments , the overlapping transversal filaments form the central region of the structure . structure of synaptonemal complex- it keeps together the homologous chromosomes ( bivalent , tetrads ) like a zip . due to dna condensation , chromosomes become thicker and more visible , and the synapses are completed in pachytene . after pairing , they form structures composed of two chromosomes , maternal and paternal one ( bivalent ) , both having two sister chromatids ( tetrad ) . the tight binding between the homologous chromosomes leads to apparent decrease in number of chromosomes ( pseudoreduction ) . the majority of double-stranded dna breaks are repaired , but at some of them homologous recombination ( crossing-over ) , exchange of corresponding chromatids occur . this process is mediated by the recombination nodules , large 100 nm sized multi-enzyme complexes , which appear on the synaptonemal complex . the detailed molecular mechanism of crossing over is not discussed here . the crossing over may occur between any chromatids , but it results new combination of genes if it happens between non-sisters . the number of crossing overs between non-sister chromatids of a chromosome pair is 1-3. there is compulsory recombination even between the basically not homologous x and chromosomes at their pseudoautosomal regions ( par ) . checkpoint machinery controls the appearance and the process of crossing over , underlining the significance of homologous recombin6ation . in diplotene stage the synaptonemal complex largely detaches , thus the members of homologous pairs may slightly mov e away from each other , so the chromosomes are linked only at the sites of crossing overs , referred as chiazmata . finally , in diakinesis the homologous separation continues , but the bivalents are still connected at chiazmata , found between sister chromatid s of homologous chromosomes , and also by aploid s which held together sister chromatids of a chromosome . later , the aploid s dissociate from the arms and keep the chromatids together only at centromeric regions . during the prophase , kinetochore region develops on chromosomes , but in contrast to mitosis , both kinetochores of a chromosome face one pole , while the kinetochore of the homologous face opposite -in first division metaphase , not the single chromosomes , but the chromosome pairs are arranged in the equatorial plane , whereas the chiazmata still connect the homologs . chiazmata only disappear at the end of metaphase . -in the anaphase the kinetochore microtubules pull the homologous chromosomes and not the chromatids toward the poles , since the kinetochores of a chromosome face the same pole . thus , the synapses not only allow the cross-over , but also needed to halve the number of chromosomes . the separation of homologous , which member of a pair is pulled to a given pole is a random process . it increases further the genetic variation . in human it is 2^23 . in telophase , the nuclear membrane is reorganized , and the cytoplasm splits . arising cells are haploid , that is why the first division of meiosis is called reduction division . the chromosomes are still composed of two sister chromatids , which will separate in the following part , in meiosis ii . the first division is followed by a short interphase , in which there is no dna replication . second division of meiosis is also divided into pro- , meta- , ana- , and telophase , but these phases are essentially very similar to the phases of mitosis . thus , in metaphase the single chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane , and in the anaphase , the sister chromatids of the chromosomes are separated . the orientation of kinetochores is also similar to mitosis . in the telophase , the nuclear envelopes are reorganized , two nuclei are formed and then the cytoplasms are also halved . finally , the meiosis results from a diploid cell four haploid cells , the gametes . after the fusion of two haploid cells , in the zygote chromosome number of the species is reconstituted . at the same time , the genetic information of the gametes is different caused by the homologous recombination in meiosis i prophase and the random assortment of homologous in meiosis i anaphase . these processes provide high genetic variability needed for the survival of the species . the most frequent abnormality of meiosis is the non-disjunction either in meiosis i or ii . obviously , non-disjunction of both the homologous chromosomes ( in the first division ) , and the sister chromatids ( in the second division ) alters the chromosome number of resulting gametes . involvement of such gametes in fertilization may lead to so-called aneuploid genome mutation in vertebrates , the gamete formation is a complex process , the meiosis is only a part of it . at the very beginning of ontogeny primordial germ cells migrate to the developing gonads . several mitotic divisions are followed by meiosis , and finally in male gametogenesis a differentiation step gives rise to mature gametes . oogenesis : in most animals , the female gamete ( egg ) is very large compared to somatic cells . eggs contain yolk : different nutrients ( lipids , proteins , carbohydrates ) sufficient for the early development of embryo , until self-feeding will be able . although the egg of mammals contains small amount of yolk ( oligolecithal ) , it is much bigger than the body cells of the organism . the size of a human egg is about 100 m. in developing gonads of embryo the primordial germ cells ( 46 chromosomes ) develop to oogonia ( 46 chromosomes ) which divide by mitosis . the cell entering the first meiotic division is primary oocyte ( 46 chromosomes ) . meiosis i is halted , the cells may remain in prophase diplotene stage for decades . meanwhile , a coat , the zona pellucida develops around them , and in the cytoplasm cortical granules accumulate , which content is released after the sperm penetration , preventing the penetration of further sperms . from the puberty due to hormonal effects , cyclically one cell resumes meiosis i. division of the cytoplasm is asymmetric , the larger cell is the secondary oocyte ( 23 chromosomes ) , whereas the smaller cell is polocyte ( or polar cell , also has 23 chromosomes ) . the unequal cytokinesis is likely provided by the asymmetric mitotic spindle position . secondary oocyte continues meiosis , enters meiosis ii but it is halted in the metaphase . secondary oocyte is ovulated in this stage . the completion of meiosis ii is triggered by the penetration of sperm , the fertilization . the meiosis ii results a fertilized ovum which contains two pronuclei ( 23-23 chromosomes ) and a polocyte ( 23 chromosomes ) . the polocyte derived from the first divison may divide , too , but the studies usually demonstrate the presence of only two polocytes . polocyte : derived from the first division is termed primary , the other derived from the second division is termed secondary polocyte . spermatogenes is while in most species the egg is the largest cell , not capable of independent movement , the other gamete , the sperm is the smallest cell and is able to move . in male organism , primordial germ cells ( 46 chromosomes ) migrate into developing testis where they become spermatogonia ( 46 chromosomes ) in the external wall of testis . from the puberty , spermatogonia divide continuously by mitosis . a group of them enters meiosis i ; these are the primary spermatocytes ( 46 chromosomes ) . meiosis i gives rise to two haploid cells , called secondary spermatocytes ( 23 chromosomes ) . the second meiotic division makes for haploid round , immobilized cells , called spermatids ( 23 chromosomes ) . in both divisions , the cytokinesis is incomplete , the secondary spermatocytes and spermatids , too , are connected to each other by cytoplasmic bridge . after meiosis differentiation process , cytological morphogenesis begins , which results in actively motile sperms . this step is called spermiohistogenesis , which happens embedded in sertol i cells . from sertoli cells , the sperms are placed in the lumen of testis . the typical structure of differentiated sperms ( head , midpiece and tail part ) serves only one purpose , to safely convey dna content to the egg . the head contains the nucleus where dna is in completely heterochromatic form to occupy the smallest space . protamines being more positively charged proteins than histones are needed for dna to be packed so condense . in front of the nucleus , a giant secretory vesicle , acrosome is located . the acrosome vesicle containing hydrolytic enzymes is responsible for dissolving the different coats of eggs during fertilization . in the midpiece fused mitochondria are located , forming so-called mitochondrial sheath , where atp necessary for the movements of the sperm is produced . the tail essentially is a flagellum composed of 9x2+2 microtubule system , additionally at the periphery there are nine dense keratin containing fibrils whose function is still not clear . recent studies have demonstrated the differences of spermatogenesis or oogenesis regarding the meiosis i prophase . regulation of meiosis : the regulation of meiotic division has primarily been studied in amphibian and fish oogenesis . firstly , mpf itself has been found to be the regulator of amphibian oogenesis , and only later was discovered that it was equal to m-phase or mitosis triggering factor ( mpf ) , which is composed of cdk1 and cyclin b. there are crucial differences in the process of oogenesis and spermatogenesis , consequently in the regulation , too . the first difference is the start time of meiosis . the oogenesis begins in early embryonic life , the spermatogenesis in puberty . it has been demonstrated that retinoic acid is responsible for meiotic trigger . retinoic acid that is spermatogenesis oogenesis initialization of the process during life puberty second month of the embryonic life halted in the diplotene stage of meiosis i in the fifth month rhythm of the process continuous , without interruption cyclic from the puberty : monthly one oocyte pro ovum continues meiosis , enters meiosis ii but it is halted in the metaphase , completion of meiosis ii is triggered by the fertilization time required for gamete formation 60-65 days even 50 years . from the beginning of the fifth month of the embryonic life , the homologues in the primary oocytes are held together at the chiasmata , effectiveness of the regulatory mechanism elimination of faulty spermatocytes by effective meiotic checkpoint control system the checkpoint control system of the meiotic spindle formation is less effective leading to an increased risk of nondisjunction and aneuploidies result of gametogenesis 4 equivalent sperms one oocyte+2 polocytes cell number at fertilization 15-150 million sperms/ ejaculation one ( two ) oocyte ( s ) /month termination of the process during life continues for a lifetime terminates at menopause metabolized by cyp26b1 is produced in both sexes embryo . since the amount and the activity of cyp26b1 is higher in male than in female embryo , retinoic acid is degraded in males , but in females as a signal induces the expression and effect of stra8 transcriptional factor . in oogonia stra8 triggers the meiosis . the meiosis i starts but stops in prophase diplotene stage . the elevation of camp has been detected in primary oocyte , which in turn inactivates mpf via protein kinase a. from puberty camp decreases cyclically in a primary oocyte , indirectly activating mpf , needed to continue meiosis i. the second arrest of the meiosis is in the metaphase of meiosis ii . the role of a not precisely identified protein , called cytostatic factor ( cfs ) is assumed . it is under the regulation of mos protooncogene ( serine/threonine kinase ) and inhibits apc activity via mapk pathway . in the case fertilization the ca ion level is elevated that is needed for the reactivation of apc . the activated apc induces the degradation of b cyclin and securin in the proteasome . the not inhibited separase may separate cohesin from the centromeres of chromosomes , allowing the sister chromatid separation in anaphase . lack of b cyclin inactivates mpf and the cell , which is already the zygote , may complete the division . then , the zygote starts segmentation ( cleavage ) which is characterized by a special , so-called embryonic cell cycle . in embryonic cell cycle there is no g1 and g2 , consequently cell growth , the cell size gradually decreases . embryonic cell cycle is regulated by the same mpf , which controlled the meiosis . genetic variations : mutation and polymorphism- according to the classic definition , mutations are sudden heritable changes in the dna . the process ( change ) itself is still called mutation , but due to the fast development of genetics and genomics , two terms related to the variations in the sequence had to be modified . next to the above-mentioned definition the term mutation is also used to indicate a disease-causing change or sometimes rare change . similarly , the term polymorphism is used both to indicate a non-disease-causing change , or a change found at a frequency of 1 % or higher in the population . in the era of advanced dna sequencing tools and personal genomics , these earlier definitions of mutation and polymorphism are antiquated . the 1 % or higher frequency associated with a polymorphism is an arbitrary number and in addition , there are examples that variations with > 1 % frequencies can cause diseases . for instance , sickle-cell anemia is caused by a nucleotide change whose frequency is > 1 % in a gene coding for the beta chain of the hemoglobin protein . the disease manifests in people who have two copies of the mutated gene . to prevent this confusion , a new usage of these terms is suggested . it is proposed that in most cases , instead of mutation and polymorphism neutral terms like `` sequence variant '' , `` alteration '' and `` allelic variant '' should be used . the term mutation may be used to indicate the result of a recent mutation event which has been detected using as a reference the germline dna of the same individual . therefore , a mutation would be a dna variant acquired over the lifetime of an organism , i.e . a somatic mutation . in this sense , mutations are the principal causes of many diseases like cancer but are typically not inherited by their offspring . alterations in the dna of germ cells sperms and eggs can be inherited by offspring and are currently called germline mutations . in this case , the term mutation should be used only if the germline variant has been detected using as a reference the germline dna of the same individual . in the case , a sequencing project did not include as a reference the germ-line dna of an individual , the term mutation could not be used and should be replaced by the neutral term variant . therefore , in the sequencing report the alternative use of the term mutation or variant will also clarify which kind of reference was adopted . importantly , the term polymorphism should only be used in the context of a population . accordingly , this term can not be approved to classify variants in personal genomics . the classification of mutations : to evaluate mutations , it is crucial to know where , in what cell types they occur . somatic mutation is formed in a given somatic cell , and when this cell divides successively the mutation is transmitted to the offspring , so a mutation carrying cell clone is formed . depending on the time of the mutation , whether it is formed earlier or later in ontogeny , the number of cells involved , and the size of mutant clones will differ . a classic example of somatic mutations when one of the eyes is blue , the other is brown . then the mutation occurred after the separation of the eye primordium . the other situation is when brown spots can be seen in a blue eye ; in this case the mutation took place after the development of the two separate eyes . somatic mutations in natural conditions-except the vegetative propagation of plants-are not passed on to offspring . however , the medical significance is not negligible , since somatic mutations may also play a role in tumorigenicity . according to knudson 's hypothesis ( two hit theory ) for the development of certain cancers affecting tumor suppressor genes , two successive mutations are required . the tumor suppressor gene mutations are recessive , so two mutant copies are necessary for the complete loss of function , and then the tumor formation . one is usually inherited , while other is formed only in one or certain organs such the previous heterozygous state is lost and the homozygosity of the mutant tumor suppressor gene leads to tumor formation . the phenomenon is called loss of heterozygosity=loh , and by using modern molecular biological methods , it may be suitable for the detection of pre-cancerous conditions . germline mutations occurring in primordial germ cells or in germ cells during gametogenesis are inherited to the offspring , and therefore they have crucial importance in medicine . according to their origin there are spontaneous , due to defective dna replication , and induced mutations caused by various environmental effects ( radiation , chemicals , etc. ) . the mutation frequency depends on the evolutionary level , since in prokaryotes in the absence of dna repair the mutation rate is much higher than eukaryotes . accordingly , high mutation frequency was observed in mitochondria with its prokaryotic-like dna . this is about ten times ( ! ) higher than the mutation rate of the nuclear dna , which is about 10-5 per gene per generation . the most frequent spontaneous mutations are : 1/deaminations or 2/depurinations 1/ during deamination cytosine is converted to uracil , and adenine to hypoxanthine ; 2/ during depurination the sugar-phosphate backbone of dna remains intact , but the purine base , e.g . guanine is lost , so it will be a toothless dna , so a gap is formed in the dna strand . the frequency of spontaneous mutations is influenced by the cell or tissue type , rapidly proliferating cells and tissues carry more spontaneous mutations , as the higher the rate of dna duplication , the greater the chance of erroneous incorporation of nucleotides . the best-known induced mutation is the uv radiation-induced one . the uv radiation induces dimerization of thymine , this distorts the dna , interferes with dna replication and transcription . similarly , incorporation of certain base analogues as 5 bromodeoxyuridine ( brd u ) during dna replication and the subsequent incorrect dna repair , results in a change in the original sequence . alkylating compounds ( ems=ethyl-methane-sulfonate , mnu=methyl-nitroso-urea ) attaches ethyl or methyl groups to certain dna bases like guanine , and thus o6-methylguanine arises . this causes mutation because o6-methylguanine pairs thymine instead of cytosine , therefore following the methylation of dna bases in the subsequent replication another base will be incorporated into the newly synthesized strand , so the mutation is fixed . intercalating compounds ( proflavin , acridine orange ) either merge in to the dna strand between bases , or create dna loops which in future replication and repair processes will lead to shorter dna ( deletion ) or to dna lengthening ( duplication ) . some carcinogens ( e.g . benzo ( a ) pyrene ) connects larger molecules to the dna , so-called adducts are created . the mutations were also classified according to the degree of change caused in the dna . thus , we can talk about gene mutation- this is sometimes called point mutation , chromosome mutation when the lesion involves several genes , and genome mutation , which can affect the entire genetic material . gene mutations gene mutations can affect a single base of a gene- this is called point mutation in narrow sense- and may affect a greater or lesser portion of the gene . a single base limited mutation can be addition , deletion , or base substitution . if the number of bases added or deleted is not equal to three or a whole number multiple of it ( 6 , 9 , 12 etc . ) , a so-called frame-shift mutation is created . this means that downstream from the mutation site the transcriptional reading of the coded information is changed . if 3 or 6 , 9 , etc . is the number of bases inserted or eliminated , so in frame mutation occurs , only the affected section of information content changes the rest of the genes does not . there are two additional opportunities in base substitution , the transition and the transversion . in the first case a purine is replaced by another purine base or a pyrimidine base by another pyrimidine e.g . a- > g or c- > t . in the latter case , a purine base is exchanged by a pyrimidine base or vice versa a pyrimidine by a purine . the effects of substitution mutations are more varied . there is missense , nonsense and silent or sense mutations . following a missense mutation , the codon changes , and thus a different amino acid is incorporated into the protein , e.g . the mutation causing sickle cell anemia , wherein base exchange results in the incorporation of valine in place of glutamine as 6th amino acid in b-globin chain of hemoglobin . due to a nonsense mutation , the original codon changes to stop codon , so early termination of the protein chain , and a shorter protein molecule will be the result . in the case of silent or sense mutation due to degenerated genetic code , although the codon changes , the same amino acid is incorporated into a protein , so the mutation has no consequences . this mainly occurs when the 3rd and 2nd base of the codon is replaced by another one . whereas , during a cell 's life dna replicates several times and may be repeatedly exposed to mutagenic agents several- even different types- mutations may occur . some of the recurrent mutations affect the part is already mutated , restoring the original sequence . then a so-called back or reverse mutation takes pace , and thus the potentially harmful consequences of the first mutation are eliminated . there is another possibility to apparently eliminate the consequence of a mutation . in prokaryotes , it has been observed that although the dna mutated , different amino acid was not built into the protein . it turned out that in this case trna also mutated and yet it delivered the original amino acid to the altered m rna codon . such trna is called suppressor trna . if the mutation affected an extended sequence ( any number of bases ) in the gene , then gene deletion , addition , or when the given sequence is reversed , gene inversion takes place . longer deletions may also affect not only one gene , but either gene families , ( where genes with similar but not identical function , derived from an ancestral gene , are located directly one after the other in the dna ) . such is the case of deletions affecting globin gene families in various hemoglobin disorders ( hemoglobinopathies ) , for example in thalassemias ( its mutation mechanism is discussed at mutation hot spots ) . of course , the longer the lesion , the more severe the consequences , that is the more wrong , altered or functionless the protein product as well . a special case of gene mutations , namely the additions is , when alu sequences or line elements are integrated into the coding region of a gene by transposition or retrotransposition . then the addition of the jumping element ( transposon or retroposon ) breaks the original exon sequence , and thus leads to rna and protein formation of altered information content . in the case of hemophilia a addition of an alu sequence causes the disease . similarly , gene duplication due to recombination results in mutation as well . it occurs either in meiosis , when unequal crossing over between non-sister chromatids leads to gene duplication , or in mitosis , when rarely mitotic recombination ( crossing-over ) takes place between sister chromatids . in the latter case , it is a somatic mutation , and may lead to tumorigenesis by creating such daughter cells , where in one of them the heterozygosity is lost . ( in the other daughter cell three copies of the gene are present , where gene duplication is in one of the homologous chromosomes while the other homologue is with a single locus of the given gene ) . the so-called mutational hot spots should be mentioned here . individual dna sequences , genes more likely mutate , where repetitive sequences are found . these repeats may interfere with the replication and meiotic pairing of the homologous chromosomes . the replication abnormality has physical causes : symmetrical or repetitive sequences located on the same strand of unwound dna can pair on the basis of complementarity or can form loops , and thus disturb the function of enzymes involved in replication and repair . for example , in hemophilia b , where large direct sequences with cg repeats occur in the factor ix . coding gene , there are 10 to 100 times more mutations . this higher mutation frequency may be attributable to epigenetic causes as well . methylated cytosine easily deaminates to thymine , thus leading to a ct transition on one strand and a ga transition on the other . the above-mentioned uneven crossing ( see chapter 4 , cytogenetics ) can explain the repetition of larger sequences , sometimes of entire genes . for this phenomenon , a good example is the formation of- thalassemia . normally , both homologs of chromosome 16 contain two-globin genes one after the other . the uneven crossing over can result in gametes , which for example contain 1 , or 3-globin genes . following the fertilization of such zygotes may be formed in which one more or one less-globin genes are present . the person 's health depends on the number of-globin genes : 0 copy- intrauterine lethality , 1 copy- severe anemia , 2 copies- mild anemia , three copies- asymptomatic carrier can be the consequence . today , more than 30 diseases are known , which are caused by uneven crossing over ( e.g . red-green color blindness ) . not only the direct repeats , but palindromic sequences ( sequences of which base sequence in 5'-3 ' direction is the same on both strands ) can frequently lead to additions and deletions . a special type of gene mutations are the repeat mutations where different numbers of nucleotides are repeated forming so called repetitive units . beside the best known trinucleotide repeat mutations there are other length mutations involving up to 24 nucleotides long units , thus resulting in the accumulation of e.g . octapeptide units in the protein ( creutzfeldt-jakob disease ) . several types of trinucleotide repeat mutations are known . polyglutamine diseases associated with the expansion of cag triplets ( cag is the code of glutamine ) . the currently known cag trinucleotide repeat mutations results in severe neurological diseases , so-called neurodegenerative disorders , but numbers of disease-causing repeats are different . in the case of huntington 's chorea and kennedy disease , repeats affect the protein coding region of the gene . another large group of known trinucleotide repeat mutations are the polyalanine diseases in which gcn triplets ( n can be any nucleotide ) are accumulated , causing alanine accumulation in the protein . they are mainly transcription factor affecting mutations which generally lead to developmental malformation syndromes such as synpolydactylia or hand-food-genital syndrome . while the aforementioned trinucleotide repeats are in the coding regions of the genes , in the case of myotonic muscular dystrophy and fragile x syndrome , the repeats are in the untranslated region = utr , and generally the number of repeats is larger as well . it is typical for the repeat mutations that the diseases are caused only above a certain number of repeats , so there is a so-called premutation state , and that the repeat expansion ( the increase in the repeat number ) takes place during meiosis . the increase in the number of repeats ( e.g . cag ) is the result of a process ( already mentioned at the mutation hot spots ) , when during the replication one of the dna strands is looped due to the repetitive sequences . if this looping affects the newly synthetized strand , the replication apparatus can detect it as if the replication had not been completely carried out from the template strand , so more repeat units are added to the new strand . this phenomenon is called replication skipping . with this the new strand contains several new repeat units as well . the old and the new strands are different in length , and then the repair mechanism corrects it by adding a sufficient number of new repeats to the old strand . the opposite phenomenon also exists- that may decrease the number of repeats . in this case looping affects the template strand , i.e . the newly synthetized strand will be shorter than the original was . however , in this case the repair will correct the error , too , i.e . the unnecessary number of repeats will be cut out from the old strand , so eventually there will be a dna molecule containing fewer repeat units . since dna replication takes place before mitosis and meiosis and , in principle , the repeat number can change in both cases . in contrast , in the case of gcn trinucleotide repeats the change in the repeat number is rather explained by a meiotic event namely by uneven crossing over . since the number of repeats varies from generation to generation , the repeat mutations are not stable and therefore they are recently also called dynamic mutations . in the case of prokaryotes , this dynamism has an important role in counteracting with the effects of the host 's immune system ; in eukaryotes , it may play a role in tumorigenicity . the role of repeat mutations that cause disease is easy to see , since with the addition of increased number of repeats into the coding sequence , with this expansion , the structure of the gene involved will be more and more distorted , therefore the protein is coded by it becomes more and more altered and no n-functioning . there is a phenomenon called anticipation- long been known in human genetics but can not be explained for a long time . anticipation means that a hereditary disease transmitted from generation to generation will appear in younger and younger age and in more and more severe form . since the repeat expansions of medical importance takes place especially in meiosis ( or in the previous s phase ) , and the gene in question will be increasingly damaged by this process , the above-mentioned phenomenon is well explained . in case of gene mutations , not only the size of the mutation , the length of the dna sequence in question is important , but in eukaryotes , including humans the place of mutation is important as well . it is not all the same whether a mutation is in a coding or non-coding region or in an untranslated region , in an exon or an intron , or even in the border between them . in the latter case , so-called splicing mutations can be formed , because the exon-intron boundary sequences play an important role in the intron looping , in the lariat format ion thereby , in spliceosome function . as a consequence of splicing mutations an exon is lost , or an intron can be translated , and a definitely defective protein will be the end result . even mutations of a single gene , which occur at various places , or base exchanges or splicing mutations can cause symptoms of completely different diseases , or symptoms of different severity as it is known for a large number of mutations in cystic fibrosis . the role of the utr mutations had not been understood till the past few years , since at first glance we might think that a mutation affecting the non - coding dna sequences only , and therefore no defective protein had been produced , could not cause symptoms or disease . in contrast , we now know that the 5 ' utr region of the mrna is required for ribosome binding , and normal protein synthesis . thus , it was also understood that some of the trinucleotide repeat mutations in which the expansion affects the utr region why cause diseases . moreover , the methylation of cytosines in a number of repeats induces epigenetic alterations ( attachment of methyl-binding proteins and/or non-coding rnas , chromatin remodeling ) , which also explains the role of the utr mutations in disease . although as a result of the human genome project the human dna sequence is almost completely known , but knowing the sequence does not imply the identification of the gene and knowing the gene does not automatically mean the understanding of its function . this is particularly problematic in those cases where the mutation results in a new protein with different functions , but neither the original protein nor the mutation itself is known . these are the so-called gain of function mutations . it makes the genetic analysis more difficult . it is typical for huntington disease , where the exact original function of the finally identified huntington protein is still not well understood . the situation is simpler when a mutation changes the structure or the function of a previously known protein . then loss-of-function mutations are present like in the case of phenylketonuria or sickle cell anemia . these loss-of-function mutations are usually recessive , so they manifest in the phenotype only in homozygous form . this may be so because for most of the gene products the exact quantity is not crucial , and the system works correctly with half dose as well . however , there are dose-sensitive genes , where 50 % of the product is not enough . this is called haploinsufficiency ( haplo=single ; insufficient=failure ) . so , the phenotype is abnormal even in heterozygotes , therefore dominant inheritance is typical for loss-of-function mutations . it also occurs that , due to the mutation , not only the original function of the gene product is lost , but the mutant product prevents normal function of the normal product , e.g . they can not dimerize . this is called dominant-negative effect , when the mutation is associated with dominant phenotype and is also expressed in heterozygous form . dna repair : if the dna or the genes themselves can mutate in so many ways , it is not surprising that a number of mechanisms developed during evolution to ensure the integrity of the genetic material that protect against mutations and to correct the resulting errors . the name for these mechanisms is dna repair . these mechanisms are grouped according to 1/ whether it reverses the chemical reaction that causes mutation ; it is the direct repair , or 2/ it cuts out the incorrect bases and replaces by correct ones ; it is known as excision repair . 1/ the best example of the direct repair is the removal uv-induced thymine dimers . photoreactivation is a process typical mainly for prokaryotes and for some eukaryotes ( e.g . yeast ) . in this process , the cyclobutane ring formed between the pyrimidine bases are slit by the use of visible light energy , and the bases remain in their original location , and the previous structure is restored . although uv radiation is one of the most mutagenic effects ( just think about the growing ozone hole and the intensive uv radiation exposure over earth 's surface ) , unfortunately , many species , including humans are not capable of this photoreactivation repair . another direct repair mechanism is the removal of alkylated bases . the o6-methylguanine methyltransferase enzyme removes the methyl group of guanine by linking it to a cysteine base in its active site . such enzymes are found both in pro- and eukaryotes . 2/ the excision repair is more common than the direct repair . there are three types : a/ base excision , b/ nucleotide excision , c/ mismatch repair , a/ during the base excision repair the single incorrectly incorporated base is spliced out and the dna polymerase fills the gap by using the intact complementary strand as a template . b/ in nucleotide excision , repair not only the mutated part e.g . thymine dimer is cleaved off , but also the preceding and following few other nucleotides , i.e . a shorter oligonucleotide sequence . then , the dna polymerase fills the gap based on the undamaged complementary strand , and dna ligase connects the old and the repaired section . for this process in humans , seven different genes are required and mutations in any of them are associated with uncorrected uv radiation-induced mutations . it is typical for rare inherited disorders , such as the cockayne syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum . the latter disease is a good example of genetic heterogeneity , since the errors of different excision repair enzymes result in the same symptoms . c/ during mismatch repair not exactly complementary bases that not exactly fit to the double helix are recognized and removed . during dna replication- in parallel with the synthesis-mismatched bases are detected and removed by the proof-reading ( 3 ' 5 ' exonuclease ) activity of the dna polymerase enzyme . those that escape this process are corrected by the enzymes of the mismatch repair complex . while bacterial mismatch repair is relatively well , human one is less known . however , we know that the common hereditary colon cancer is caused by mutations in some genes of the mismatch repair protein complex . so not only mutations in a specific protein coding gene , but any molecular defects in the repair mechanism can also lead to disease . both the direct and the excision repair take place before dna replication , ensuring that only the correct dna molecules replication is possible . however , the cells have multiple insurance , so there are two additional , alternative , post-replication repair mechanism s in case of the failure of the first two repair processes . one of them is the recombination repair , the other is the so called error-prone or sos repair . during the recombination repair the mutation remains uncorrected- for example a thymine dimer inhibits dna synthesis , so there will be a gap in the right place in the new strand . ( the synthesis is not interrupted completely because the dna polymerase- as in the case of okazaki fragments can synthesize a new strand in pieces ) . the gap is filled after recombining with the original strand , while the gap of the original strand derived from the previous recombination is filled by dna polymerase and ligase enzymes in cooperation . this late repair mechanism makes the correction of a mutation possible before the next dna replication . the sos or error-prone repair is known only in prokaryotes ( although similar mechanisms are assumed in eukaryote s as well ) , and it works only in extreme cases where cell survival is at stake . when much of the dna is damaged by strong radiation or other mutagenic agents , there is no time for the precise yet time-consuming repair mechanisms mentioned above , but to correct the dna damage quickly and inaccurately , thus avoiding the immediate cell death . it is obvious that such a mechanism in multicellular eukaryotes is not necessary , since the death of a single cell does not lead to the death of the whole organism , the other cells will take over the function of the lost cell . the most difficult is to correct those mutations which are usually caused by ionizing radiation or oxidative damage resulting double-stranded dna breaks , since then- in contrast to the previously mentioned repair mechanisms- there is no template strand serving as the basis of correction . the double-stranded breaks- given that free ends are generated- increase chromosome instability and thus can lead to structural chromosomal abnormalities . there are two mechanisms to correct them : a/ the so-called non-homologous end joining ( nhej ) b/ the homologous recombination in nhej , a special dna ligase with a cofactor brings the broken ends together . if the double-stranded break creates fragments with overhanging strands and microhomologous sequences then the repair is most likely correct . if the fragments have blunt ends , then there is a high chance to unite not related pieces and generate structural chromosome abnormality as well . for error correction homologous recombination repair uses either the correct sequence of the homologous chromosome , or in g2 phase of the cell cycle the sister chromatid already formed as template by an enzyme system similar to that used in the crossing over . of course , not only various mechanisms for repair are available to protect genome integrity , but inactivation systems as well which can neutralize or inactivate mutagenic agents . such as the peroxisomal system in which the oxidative and thus mutagenic superoxides are eliminated by superoxide dismutase that converts peroxides h2 o2 , then catalase cleaves and thus neutralizes it . mutagenicity tests : to avoid the adverse effect of mutations , however , we can not rely exclusively on cells with evolutionarily integrated repair mechanisms , but everything possible must be done to prevent the production and the marketing materials of any mutagenic effect . this is the aim of the mutagenicity tests . according to international regulations , all prospective medicines and chemicals are subjects to the so-called pharmacological safety studies including different types of the mutagenicity tests . it is important that the widest possible spectrum of-from prokaryotes to eukaryotes , including mammals and human- in vivo or in vitro tests be carried out to eliminate the mutagenicity , the mutation- inducing effects . generally , to detect point mutations bacterial direct tests such as the ames test are the first , when the test material is directly administered to the appropriate culture of bacterial strains . however , it is also possible that not the test substance itself , but one of its metabolites is mutagenic , in this case mammalian liver microsome fraction containing enzymes necessary for the metabolism is also added to the experimental system . mutagenicity tests not only for the detection of point mutations but for the detection of mutations affecting dna repair and causing numerical and structural chromosome aberrations are also available . genetics in diabetes : type diabetes and related traits , the past decade has seen unprecedented progress in the understanding of the genetic basis of type2 diabetes ( t2 d ) , fueled largely by technological advancement . this has led to large scale studies such as various genome wide association studies ( gwas ) . gene discovery efforts for type 2 diabetes touching upon gwas studies in t2d which led to the identification of around 70 genomic loci . even in the absence of mechanistic understanding gwas signal , patterns still provide insights into disease pathogenesis . the variants associated with t2d have been predominantly through insulin secretion rather than peripheral insulin sensitivity . a similar case is presented in traits such as obesity and body mass index ( bmi ) . that these genetic variants have a physiological and pathological role is evident . gwas data have shown that physiological variation in fasting glucose levels does not overlap with those implicated in pathological deterioration of glycaemic control often . this has been explained by the authors through magic ( the metaanalyses of glucose and insulin related traits consortium ) study . fine mapping of t2d susceptibility loci : a range of approaches for assaying genetic variation across complex human traits loci and the methodologies for fine mapping causal variants in these regions have been delineated . the genetic architecture and pathophysiological mechanisms underpinning the diseases , fine mapping of loci is very important . the advent of next generation sequencing ( ngs ) has stepped up the tempo for discovery and interrogation of the full catalogue of human genetic variation . unlike the sanger sequencing , ngs could generate a huge amount of data . gwas studies of glycaemic traits , posing first , the question on glycaemic traits and then answering that disease subclassification is possible through glycaemic traits which are highly regulated within each individual and that the identification of genetic loci that influence glycaemic traits is an avenue to understand this . international collaborative efforts are the best way to generate massive data to understand the genetic underpinning of t2d . obesity and related traits touching upon the genetic architecture of obesity traits such as whr , bmi and also stressing the need for in vitro experiments and experiments on model organisms to elucidate the biological mechanism of obesity . gene discovery efforts for monogenic disorders of cell dysfunction and insulin resistance . while t2d is affected by a combination of genes and environment , monogenic forms of t2 dare more genetically enriched . the advent of ngshas helped in the diagnosis of monogenic diabetes and also in the discovery of novel aetiologies . the application of targeted ngs for clinical diagnostic testing or screening of known genes and exome analysis for novel gene discovery . the strategy for discovery and diagnosis of gene variants in neonatal diabetes and mody ( maturity onset diabetes of the young ) , has been detailed . the importance of genetic testing and treatment changes due to mutations in genes with high translational potential is also emphasized . omics of t2d and related traits , the new field of epigenetic modifications in t2d is reviewed well . transcriptome analysis serves as a tool for disease biology understanding is well accounted for . this is followed by genomics of adipose tissue and advancement in understanding of its role in obesity and its traits . the importance of continuing genetic , epigenetic and transcript data to understand the importance of gene variants discovered by gwas . a good account on the future directions of functional translation which will deliver to clinical medicine is also available . the advancements in the study of mouse models for understanding molecular mechanisms of diabetes and obesity . the fto gene has been identified as one of the obesities associated genes . whether it is possible to get the right drug at the right dose for the right person is a million-dollar question . the clinical impact of genetic diagnosis is discussed , taking mody as an example . the myriad clinical potentials of genomics , where patient stratification , prediction of risk of diabetes and its complications , therapeutic stratification and the discovery of novel therapeutic targets are possible . previous studies have examined individual dietary and lifestyle factors in relation to type 2 diabetes , but the combined effects of these factors are largely unknown . we followed 84,941 female nurses from 1980 to 1996 ; these women were free of diagnosed cardiovascular disease , diabetes , and cancer at base line . information about their diet and lifestyle was updated periodically . a low-risk group was defined according to a combination of five variables : a body mass index ( the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters ) of less than 25 ; a diet high in cereal fiber and polyunsaturated fat and low in trans-fat and glycemic load ( which reflects the effect of diet on the blood glucose level ) ; engagement in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity for at least half an hour per day ; no current smoking ; and the consumption of an average of at least half a drink of an alcoholic beverage per day . during 16 years of follow-up , we documented 3300 new cases of type 2 diabetes . overweight or obesity was the single most important predictor of diabetes . lack of exercise , a poor diet , current smoking , and abstinence from alcohol use were all associated with a significantly increased risk of diabetes , even after adjustment for the body-mass index . as compared with the rest of the cohort , women in the low-risk group ( 3.4 percent of the women ) had a relative risk of diabetes of 0.09 ( 95 percent confidence interval , 0.05 to 0.17 ) . a total of 91 percent of the cases of diabetes in this cohort ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 95 percent ) could be attributed to habits and forms of behavior that did not conform to the low-risk pattern . conclusions our findings support the hypothesis that the majority of cases of type 2 diabetes could be prevented by the adoption of a healthier lifestyle . several lifestyle factors affect the incidence of type 2 diabetes . obesity and weight gain dramatically increase the risk , and physical inactivity further elevates the risk , independently of obesity . cigarette smoking is associated with a small increase and moderate alcohol consumption with a decrease in the risk of diabetes . in addition , a low fiber diet with a high glycemic index has been associated with an increased risk of diabetes , and specific dietary fatty acids may differentially affect insulin resistance and the risk of diabetes . in most previous studies , dietary and lifestyle factors have been considered individually , although behavioral factors are typically correlated with one another . we therefore examined simultaneously a set of dietary and lifestyle factors in relation to the risk of type 2 diabetes and estimated the proportion of cases that could theoretically be avoided through the simultaneous adoption of multiple types of low-risk behavior . the nurses� health study began in 1976 , when 121,700 female nurses 30 to 55 years of age responded to a questionnaire regarding medical , lifestyle , and other health-related information.16 since then , questionnaires have been sent biennially to update this information and identify newly diagnosed cases of various diseases . diet was first assessed in 1980. for the current analysis , we excluded women with previously diagnosed diabetes , cancer , or cardiovascular diseases at base line and those who left more than 10 items blank on the 1980 dietary questionnaire or had implausibly low or high scores for total intake of food or energy ( less than 500 or more than 3500 kcal per day ) . after these exclusions , the analysis included 84,941 women . the follow-up rate with respect to the incidence of diabetes in the overall cohort was 97 percent of the total potential person-years of follow-up . the study was approved by the institutional review board of brigham and women�s hospital in boston ; completion of the self-administered questionnaire was considered to imply informed consent . assessment of diet : in 1980 , we assessed diet using a 61-item , semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire . an expanded dietary questionnaire including approximately 120 items was used to update the information about diet in 1984 , 1986 , and 1990. we asked how often , on average , a participant had consumed a particular amount of a specific type of food during the previous year . the intake of nutrients was computed by multiplying the frequency of consumption of each unit of food by its nutrient content . questions about the consumption of beer , wine , and liquor were included in each questionnaire . the reproducibility and validity of the food-frequency questionnaires have been described in detail previously . assessment of nondietary factors every two years , we update participants� smoking status ( never smoked , former smoker , or current smoker , including the number of cigarettes smoked per day ) , menopausal status and use or nonuse of postmenopausal hormone therapy , and body weight . reported weights have been highly correlated with measured weights ( r= 0.96 ) . the presence or absence of a family history of diabetes ( in first-degree relatives ) was assessed in 1982 and 1988. information about physical activity was first obtained in 1980 and was updated in 1982 , 1986 , 1988 , and 1992 with the use of a validated questionnaire . we estimated the amount of time per week spent in moderate-to-vigorous activities ( including brisk walking ) requiring the expenditure of 3 met or more per hour . definition of the low-risk group the criteria we used to define a low-risk group according to dietary and lifestyle variables were similar to those used in previous analyses of coronary disease . in terms of the body-mass index ( the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters ) , low risk was defined as a value of less than 25.0 , the standard cut off point for the classification of overweight . we did not include waist or hip circumferences in the analyses because they were first assessed in 1986 and because a high body-mass index was a much stronger predictor of diabetes in this cohort . in terms of physical activity , low risk was defined as an average of at least one half-hour per day of vigorous or moderate activity , including brisk walking , in keeping with published guidelines . in terms of cigarette smoking , low risk was defined as no current smoking , and in terms of alcohol use , low risk was defined as an average of 5g or more of alcohol per day ( about half a drink or more per day ) . because few women in this cohort drank heavily ( 1.2 percent reported drinking more than 45g of alcohol per day ) , we did not define an upper limit for alcohol consumption , although clearly such a limit would be necessary in order to establish public health guidelines . previous studies have found that a reduced risk of type 2 diabetes is associated with a higher intake of cereal fiber and polyunsaturated fat and that an increased risk is associated with a higher intake of trans fat ( formed during the partial hydrogenation of vegetable oils ) and a higher glycemic load ( which reflects the effect of diet on the blood glucose level ) . therefore , a low-risk diet was defined as a diet low in trans-fat and glycemic load and high in cereal fiber , with a high ratio of polyunsaturated to saturated fat . for each dietary factor , we assigned each woman a score between one and five , corresponding to her quintile of intake , with five representing the lowest-risk quintile , and summed her quintile values for the four nutrients . participants with composite dietary scores in the highest 40 percent among the women in the study were considered to be in the lowest risk category in terms of diet . ascertainment of cases of diabetes a supplementary questionnaire regarding symptoms , diagnostic tests , and hypoglycemic therapy was mailed to women who reported having received a diagnosis of diabetes . a case of diabetes was considered to be confirmed if at least one of the following was reported on the supplementary questionnaire : classic symptoms plus a plasma glucose concentration of at least 140 mg per deciliter ( 7.8 mmol per liter ) in the fasting state or a randomly measured plasma glucose concentration of at least 200 mg per deciliter ( 11.1 mmol per liter ) ; at least two elevated plasma glucose concentrations on different occasions ( a concentration of at least 140 mg per deciliter in the fasting state , a randomly measured concentration of at least 200 mg per deciliter , or a concentration of at least 200 mg per deciliter two or more hours after the initiation of oral glucose-tolerance testing ) in the absence of symptoms ; or treatment with hypoglycemic medication ( insulin or an oral hypoglycemic agent ) . our criteria for the classification of diabetes are consistent with those proposed by the national diabetes data group . the validity of this questionnaire has been verified in a subsample of our study population . the diagnostic criteria for type 2 diabetes changed in june 1996 , and a fasting glucose concentration of 126 mg per deciliter is now considered the threshold for a diagnosis of diabetes . we used the earlier criteria because all the cases in our cohort were diagnosed before june 1996. statistical analysis the duration of follow-up was calculated as the interval between the return of the 1980 questionnaire and the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes , death , or june 1 , 1996. relative risks were calculated by dividing the incidence of diabetes among women in the low-risk group by the incidence among the remaining women . to adjust for multiple risk factors , we used pooled logistic regression with two-year intervals , which is approximately equivalent to cox regression for time-dependent covariates . in all models , we simultaneously included terms for age , time ( eight periods ) , presence or absence of a family history of diabetes , menopausal status , and use or nonuse of postmenopausal hormone therapy . in the initial analyses , we calculated the relative risks and 95 percent confidence intervals for the different categories of each variable that was included in the low-risk profile , adjusting for age , time , presence or absence of a family history of diabetes , menopausal status , and use or nonuse of postmenopausal hormone therapy but not for the other components of the low-risk profile . we then examined the combined low-risk group , defined as women in the low-risk category for each variable , with all other women as the comparison group . we calculated the population attributable risk , an estimate of the percentage of cases of type 2 diabetes in this population that would theoretically not have occurred if all women had been in the low-risk group , assuming a causal relation between the risk factors and type 2 diabetes . we also conducted analyses stratified according to the presence or absence of a family history of diabetes and according to the body-mass index . within each stratum , we compared the women in the low-risk category with all the other women . to obtain the best estimate of long-term dietary intake and physical activity , we used the cumulative-update method , which takes the average of all previous data . for variables unrelated to diet and exercise , we used the most recent information ; the body-mass index and smoking status were updated every two years , and the information about alcohol intake was updated in 1984 , 1986 , and 1990. during 16 years of follow-up ( 1,301,055 person-years ) , we documented 3300 new cases of type 2 diabetes . the most important risk factor for type 2 diabetes was the body-mass index ; the relative risk of diabetes was 38.8 for women with a body-mass index of 35.0 or higher and 20.1 for women with a body-mass index of 30.0 to 34.9 , as compared with women who had a body-mass index of less than 23.0 even a body-mass index at the high end of the normal range ( 23.0 to 24.9 ) was associated with a substantially higher risk than a body-mass index of less than 23.0 ( relative risk , 2.67 ) . in this population , 61 percent of the cases of type 2 diabetes ( 95 percent confidence interval , 58 to 64 percent ) could be attributed to over weight ( defined as a body-mass index of 25 or higher ) . lack of exercise , a poor diet , current smoking , and abstinence from alcohol were all associated with a significantly increased risk of diabetes even after adjustment for the body-mass index . the inverse association between physical activity and the risk of diabetes was much stronger without body-mass index in the model ( the relative risk of diabetes for women who exercised for seven or more hours per week as compared with women who exercised for less than half an hour was 0.48 ; 95 percent confidence interval , 0.38 to 0.61 ) . analyses stratified according to the body-mass index showed that the associations between diabetes and diet , physical activity , smoking status , and alcohol use were generally similar among women with a normal body-mass index , those who were overweight , and those who were obese . further adjustment for the body-mass index as a continuous variable in each stratum did not substantially alter the results . in addition , the individual components of the dietary score were independently and significantly associated with the risk of diabetes when they were entered into the same model . estimates of the reduction in risk among women in the low-risk categories for three , four , or five of the modifiable risk factors . women who were in the low-risk categories for three factors ( body-mass index , diet , and exercise ) had a relative risk of diabetes of 0.12 ( 95 percent confidence interval , 0.08 to 0.16 ) as compared with all other women . the population attributable risk was 87 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 91 percent ) , suggesting that 87 percent of the new cases of diabetes in this cohort might have been prevented if all women had been in the low-risk group . the population attributable risk increased to 91 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 95 percent ) when the group included women in the low-risk categories for smoking status and alcohol consumption . only 3.4 percent of the women were in the low-risk group ( as defined in terms of all five risk factors ) . to address the possibility of surveillance bias , we conducted a sensitivity analysis restricted to the 2107 women for whom at least one symptom of diabetes was reported at the time diabetes was diagnosed ( 64 percent of the women with diabetes ) . in this sub group , the population attributable risk for the women in the low-risk group was 93 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 83 to 97 percent ) . to adjust for possible confounding by socioeconomic status , we conducted further analyses in which we controlled for the occupations of the women�s parents and the educational level of their husbands . the results did not materially change ; the population attributable risk for the women in the low-risk group was 90 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 81 to 95 percent ) . the reduction in risk associated with low risk as defined in terms of the five risk factors was similar for women with a family history of diabetes and for those without such a history and for white and nonwhite women ( approximately 3 percent of the cohort ) . among overweight women ( body-mass index , 25.0 to 29.9 ) and those with normal weight ( body-mass index , < 25.0 ) approximately half the cases of diabetes could have been prevented by the combination of a healthy diet , regular exercise , abstinence from smoking , and moderate alcohol consumption . among obese women ( body-mass index , = > 30.0 ) , a combination of a healthy diet and regular exercise was associated with a 24 percent reduction in the risk of diabetes . the addition of nonsmoking status and moderate alcohol consumption to the model increased the estimate of risk reduction somewhat but widened the confidence interval because of the small number of women with these characteristics . because a body-mass index at the high end of the normal range was associated with an increased risk of diabetes , we repeated the analysis using a body-mass index of 23.0 as the cutoff point . the population attributable risk for the low-risk group ( 2.3 percent of the cohort ) was 96 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 87 to 99 percent ) . in contrast , when we raised the body-mass�index cutoff point to 27.0 ( thereby including 4.1 percent of the cohort in the low-risk group ) , the population attributable risk for the low risk group was 88 percent ( 95 percent confidence interval , 80 to 93 percent ) . in this large cohort of middle-aged women , a combination of several lifestyle factors , including maintaining a body-mass index of 25 or lower , eating a diet high in cereal fiber and polyunsaturated fat and low in saturated and trans fats and glycemic load , exercising regularly , abstaining from smoking , and consuming alcohol moderately , was associated with an incidence of type 2 diabetes that was approximately 90 percent lower than that found among women without these factors . these results suggest that in this population the majority of cases of type 2 diabetes could be avoided by behavior modification . excess body fat is the single most important determinant of type 2 diabetes . weight control would be the most effective way to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes , but current strategies have not been very successful on a population basis , and the prevalence of obesity continues to increase . the public generally does not recognize the connection between overweight or obesity and diabetes . thus , greater efforts at education are needed . our data suggest that the percentage of cases of diabetes that are preventable by diet and exercise independently of body weight is greater among women of normal weight than among obese women . however , even among overweight and obese persons , the combination of an appropriate diet , a moderate amount of exercise , and abstinence from smoking could substantially lower the risk of type 2 diabetes . although the percentage of cases that could be avoided by means of these lifestyle changes is lower among obese persons , the absolute number of cases avoided among such persons would be greater because of their higher risk . moreover , diet and exercise are the primary factors in determining weight loss . our present results are in agreement with our previous study of coronary disease , which found that adherence to similar guidelines was associated with an 83 percent reduction in risk . these analyses underscore the common lifestyle-related origins of diabetes and coronary disease and provide further evidence that modifications of diet and lifestyle have large and multiple benefits . clinical trials in china and finland have demonstrated the feasibility and efficacy of lifestyle-intervention programs in the prevention of diabetes in high-risk populations . among 577 patients with impaired glucose tolerance in da qing , china , exercise interventions , dietary interventions , or both resulted in a decrease of 42 to 46 percent in the rate of progression from impaired glucose tolerance to diabetes during six years of follow-up . recently , the finnish diabetes prevention program reported that the modification of lifestyle reduced the incidence of type 2 diabetes by 58 percent during 3.2 years of follow-up among 522 middle-aged , overweight participants with impaired glucose tolerance . the program included a relatively small reduction in weight ( less than 4.5 kg [ 10 lb ] ) , combined with a diet low in saturated and trans-fat and high in fiber and regular moderate exercise . results from the first three years of the diabetes prevention program in the united states also show that regular exercise and the modification of diet reduced the incidence of type 2 diabetes by 58 percent among patients with impaired glucose tolerance . our results suggest that closer adherence to behavioral guidelines could reduce the risk further in both low-risk and high-risk populations . because all the women in our study were health care professionals , our findings may not apply directly to the general population . however , since risk factors for diabetes tend to be more prevalent in the general population , the magnitude of the reduction in risk that would be achievable with adherence to the behavioral guidelines we outline would probably be even greater than the magnitude of the reduction we found . although some factors we considered � for example , alcohol use and smoking � have not been ( and will probably never be ) tested in randomized trials with clinical end points , ample observational data support their associations with diabetes . nevertheless , physicians must exercise caution in recommending alcohol use , since it may lead to overuse . finally , we did not consider pharmacologic means of preventing diabetes , some of which are being tested in ongoing clinical trials in high-risk populations . diagnoses of diabetes in our study were reported by the women but were confirmed by a supplementary questionnaire regarding symptoms , diagnostic tests , and treatment . our previous study found this confirmation to be highly accurate as compared with a review of the medical records . because the women in our cohort who did not have diabetes were not uniformly screened for glucose intolerance , some cases of diabetes may not have been diagnosed . however , when the analyses were restricted to symptomatic cases of diabetes , the findings were not altered substantially , suggesting that surveillance bias is unlikely . in conclusion , our findings suggest that the majority of cases of type 2 diabetes could be prevented by weight loss , regular exercise , modification of diet , abstinence from smoking , and the consumption of limited amounts of alcohol . weight control would appear to offer the greatest benefit . genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes : hyperglycemia of type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) results from a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors that influence a number of intermediate traits ( e.g. , g-cell mass , insulin secretion , insulin action , fat distribution , obesity ) . the primary biochemical events leading to diabetes are still unknown in most cases . although several monogenic forms of diabetes have been identified , tzdm seems to be a polygenic disorder in the majority of cases . t2dm is probably also multigenic , meaning that many different combinations of gene defects may exist among diabetic patients . significant results were obtained in the identification of the genetic determinants of monogenic forms of diabetes with young age of onset . however , despite the evidence for a strong genetic background , little of the genetic risk factors for the more-common forms of polygenic t2dm are known to date . the goal of this chapter is to summarize and discuss the significant results of recent literature on the genetics of both the monogenic and polygenic forms of tzdm . type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) is a heterogeneous syndrome resulting from defects of both insulin secretion and action . the precise molecular mechanisms leading to chronic hyperglycemia are largely unknown . it is generally accepted that t2dm results from a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors that influence a number of intermediate traits of relevance to the diabetic phenotype ( e.g. , p-cell mass , insulin secretion , insulin action , fat distribution , obesity ) . in fact , t2dm appears to be composed of subtypes whereby genetic susceptibility is strongly associated with environmental factors at one end of the spectrum and highly genetic forms at the other end . although several monogenic forms of diabetes have been identified - such as maturity onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) and maternally inherited diabetes and deafness ( midd ) . t2dm seems to be a polygenic disorder in the majority of cases . t2dm shows clear familial aggregation but does not segregate in classical mendelian fashion . t2dm seems to result either from several combined gene defects or from the simultaneous action of several susceptibility alleles or else from combinations of frequent variants at several loci that may have deleterious effects when predisposing environmental factors are present . type 2 diabetes is probably also multigenic , meaning that many different combinations of gene defects may exist among diabetic patients . the primary biochemical events leading to diabetes are still unknown in most cases . genetic and environmental factors may affect both insulin secretion and insulin action . a variety of environmental factors can be implicated in the clinical expression of t2dm , such as the degree and type of obesity , sedentarity , malnutrition in fetal and perinatal periods , lifestyle , and different kinds of drugs ( e.g , steroids , diuretics , antihypertensive agents ) . it is noteworthy that obesity , which is one of the so-called environmental determinants of t2dm , is also clearly under genetic control . both disorders are frequently associated and share many metabolic abnormalities , which suggests that they might also share susceptibility genes . moreover , retrospective studies showed that low birth weight was associated with insulin resistance and t2dm in adulthood . it has been proposed that this association results from a metabolic adaptation to poor fetal nutrition . however , the identification of gene variants that contribute both to variation in fetal growth and to the susceptibility to t2dm suggests that this metabolic �programming� could be partly genetically determined . these complex interactions between genes and environment complicate the task of identifying any single genetic susceptibility factor to t2dm . three genera ! approaches have been adopted to search for genes underlying complex traits such as t2dm . the first approach is to focus on candidate genes - that is , genes selected as having a plausible role in the control of glucose homeostasis - on the basis of their known or presumed biological functions . although this approach led to the identification of several susceptibility genes with small effects , no genes with moderate or major effect on the polygenic forms of diabetes have been identified . possible explanations for this failure to identify genes with a major effect include the possibility that they do not exist . it is also possible that our ignorance of the pathophysiological mechanisms of t2dm ( and the genes that control them ) has misled our choice of candidates . the second approach is to perform genome-wide scans for linkage in collections of nuclear families or sib-pairs with t2dm . this strategy requires no presumptions as to the function of the susceptibility loci . although a large number of regions of presumed linkage have been mapped , identification of the susceptibility genes is proceeding at very slow pace . the third approach to identify diabetes genes is to study spontaneous , bred , or transgenic animal models of t2dm . the genes responsible for diabetes in these models may not necessarily be major players in typical t2dm in humans . however , such studies provide the most-direct way to improve overall understanding of the molecular circuitry that maintains glucose homeostasis . nevertheless , despite the evidence for a strong genetic background in t2dm , very few of the genetic risk factors for t2dm are known . most of the available results were obtained by studying the highly familial and monogenic forms of diabetes with young age of onset . genetics of mody the well-defined mode of inheritance with high penetrance and the early age of onset of diabetes allows the collection of multigenerational pedigrees , making mody an attractive model for genetic studies . mody is a familial form of non-insulin dependent diabetes ( niddm ) with autosomal dominant inheritance . mody usually develops at childhood , adolescence , or young adulthood and presents primary insulin-secretion defects . mody is not a single entity but presents genetic , metabolic , and clinical heterogeneity . mutations in six genes cause most of the mody cases . these genes encode the enzyme glucokinase ( mody2/gck ) and the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha ( hnf-4/mody 1 ) , hnf 1 alpha ( hnf-lmody3 ) , insulin promoter factor 1 ( ipf-l/mody4 ) , hnf 1 beta ( hnf- 1 /modys ) , and neurod 1 /beta2 . moreover , additional mody genes probably exist , since there are families in which mody does not co-segregate with markers tightly linked to the known mody loci . although the prevalence of mody is unknown , it has been estimated that 2 to 5 percent of patients with t2dm may , in fact , have mody ( ledermann , 1995 ) . the relative prevalence of the different subtypes of mody has been shown to vary greatly in studies of british , french , german , and spanish families . ( mody2 represents from 8 to 63 percent of cases ( the most-prevalent form in french families ) and mody3 from 2 1 to 64 percent of cases ( the most-prevalent form in british families ) . the other mody subtypes are rare disorders in all these populations , having been described only in a few families . additional unknown mody locus/loci ( mody-x ) represent 16 to 45 percent of the cases of mody ( the most-prevalent form in german and spanish families ) . these contrasting results may be due to differences in the genetic background of these populations or else may reflect , at least partially , ascertainment bias in the recruitment of families . glucokinase mutations and mody2 : glucokinase ( gck ) phosphorylates glucose to glucose-6phosphate in pancreatic l3 cells and hepatocytes and plays a major role in the regulation and integration of glucose metabolism . more than 80 different gck mutations have been observed . expression studies have shown that the enzymatic activity of the mutant proteins was impaired , resulting in decreased glycolytic flux in pancreatic l3 cells . this defect translates in vivo as a glucose sensing defect , leading to an increase in the blood glucose threshold that triggers insulin secretion and a right shift in the dose-response curve of glucose-induced insulin secretion . decreased net accumulation of hepatic glycogen and augmented hepatic gluconeogenesis following meals were observed in gck-deficient subjects and contribute to the post-prandial hyperglycemia of mody2 . despite these multiple defects in the pancreas and the liver , the hyperglycemia associated with gck mutations is often mild , with fewer than 50 percent of subjects presenting overt diabetes . there is a lower prevalence of diabetes microvascular complications ( i.e. , retinopathy and proteinuria ) in mody2 than in other subtypes of mody and late-onset t2dm . mutations in transcription factor genes : positional cloning of mody loci and studies in candidate genes have led to the identification of mutations in six transcription factors : hnf-la , hnf-1 l3 , hnf-4a , ipfl , and neurodl/beta2 . gene targeting experiments in animals recently has demonstrated that many of these islet-expressed genes have a key role in fetal development , p-cell differentiation , proliferation , and neogenesis . mutations in hnf-la account for most of the mutations associated with mody identified in nuclear factors . more than 80 different mutations located in the coding regions or in the promoter were found in various populations . an insulin secretory defect in the absence of insulin resistance was observed in diabetic and nondiabetic carriers of mody3 mutations , suggesting that hnf- 1 cx is , indeed , implicated in pancreatic p-cell function , in contrast to the usually mild hyperglycemia due to glucokinase deficiency , mody3 is a severe form of diabetes , often evolving to insulin requirement . microvascular complications of diabetes are observed as frequently in mody3 as in late age of onset t2dm subjects . hnf- 1 c1 also is expressed in the kidney ; a defect in the renal resorption of glucose often is associated with the pancreatic p-cell defect in mody3 subjects . heterozygous knockout mice lacking one copy of hnf- 1 a have a normal phenotype , while mody3 subjects are all heterozygous for their mutations and fully express the diabetes phenotype . this observation suggests that these mutations might have a dominant-negative effect . however , experimental data show that only the mutations located in the transactivation domain of hnf-la have a dominant-negative effect on hnf-lo transactivation potential . mutations located elsewhere in the protein do not interfere with the activity of the normal allele . the target genes associated with the p-cell defect of mody3 remain unknown . contrasting results were observed in studies of knockout mice notably regarding the role of the insulin gene . modyl is much less prevalent than mody2 and mody3 . only a few kindred other than the large american rw family were found to carry an hnf-4o mutation . hnf-4a is a member of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily and upstream regulator of hnf-la expression . interestingly , it was demonstrated that long-chain fatty acids directly modulate the transcriptional activity of hnf-4a by binding as acyl-coa thioesters to the ligand binding domain of hnf-4a . this binding results in the activation or the inhibition of hnf-4a transcriptional activity as a function of chain length and the degree of saturation of the fatty acyl-coa ligand . this observation contributes important data to the understanding of the role of dietary fats in the control of insulin secretion . here , again , the target genes of hnf-4a associated with @ cell defect are not clearly determined . mutations in hnf- 1 p recently were described in a few families with familial diabetes with early onset consistent with mody . in these pedigrees , hnf-1p mutations were associated with diabetes and severe kidney disease that may appear before the impairment of glucose tolerance . polycystic renal disease and/or particular histological abnormalities showing meganephrons were present in some subjects , suggesting that this gene could play a major role in kidney development and nephron differentiation . it is noteworthy that hnf- 1 p and hnf- la can form heterodimers to bind dna . all of these genetic defects in transcription factors lead to abnormalities of glucose homeostasis , thereby promoting the development of chronic hyperglycemia through alterations in insulin secretion and possibly in the development of the pancreatic islets . in this regard , a deletion in the homeodomain transcription factor insulin promoter factor-l ( ipf-1 or idx- 1 , stf-1 , pdx-1 ) was found to co-segregate with mody in large kindred presenting a consanguineous link . this mutation results in a premature stop codon and a protein lacking a domain that is crucial for dna binding . the phenotype of the subjects who are heterozygous for the mutation ranges from normal to impaired glucose tolerance to overt niddm . one child who is homozygous for the mutation was born with pancreatic agenesis and suffers from diabetes as well as exocrine insufficiency . ipf-1 is critically required for the embryonic development of the pancreatic islets as well as for transcriptional regulation of endocrine pancreatic tissue-specific genes in adults , such as the insulin , glucose transporter-2 ( glut2 ) , and glucokinase genes in l3 cells and the somatostatin gene in & cells . ipf-1 normally is expressed in all cells of the pancreatic bud . its absence in mice arrests development at the bud stage , leading to pancreatic agenesis . the transcription factor neurodl ( also known as beta 2 ) is involved in the regulation of endocrine pancreas development . in mice homozygous for a targeted disruption of neurodl , pancreatic islet morphogenesis is abnormal , and hyperglycemia develops , due in part to inadequate expression of the insulin gene . recently , mutations in neurodl were shown to co-segregate with t2dm of early age of onset and autosomal dominant-like transmission in two caucasian kindreds . this observation suggests that neurod 1 might play an important role in endocrine pancreas development and/or insulin gene expression in humans . mitochondrial diabetes and wolfram syndrome : mitochondria contain their own genetic information in the form of a circular dna molecule of 16,569 base pairs that encodes 13 subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation complex , two ribosomal rnas , and 22 transfer rnas ( trna ) needed for mitochondrial protein synthesis . several mitochondrial cytopathies and syndromes caused by point mutations , deletions , or duplications of mitochondrial dna ( mtdna ) and characterized by decreased oxidative phosphorylation are associated with diabetes . moreover , about 40-point mutations of mtdna have been identified in subjects and families having maternally inherited diabetes as the main phenotypic trait . only one of these mutations , an a-to-g transition in the mitochondrial trnaleucuur ) gene at base-pair 3243 , has been systematically tested and phenotypically characterized in several populations . it co-segregates in families with diabetes and sensorineural deafness of maternal transmission , a syndrome known as maternally inherited diabetes and deafness ( midd ) . in some populations , midd might represent 1 to 3 percent of all cases of t2dm . the same mutation was observed in patients with melas - a syndrome of mitochondrial myopathy , encephalopathy , lactic acidosis , and stroke-like episodes -that is often accompanied by diabetes and deafness . the mechanisms underlying the different phenotypic expression ( midd or melas ) are unknown but might be related to the variable degree of heteroplasmy in different tissues . subjects with the 3243 mutations may present with variable clinical features , ranging from normal glucose tolerance to insulin-requiring diabetes . however , abnormalities in insulin secretion were found in all midd subjects that were tested , including those with normal glucose tolerance . the pathophysiological mechanisms leading to hyperglycemia and often to insulin-requiring diabetes in this syndrome are probably complex and multifactorial and might include defects in insulin production or glucose toxicity as well as insulin resistance . however , a defect of glucose-regulated insulin secretion is an early , possible primary abnormality in carriers of the mutation . this defect probably results from the progressive reduction of oxidative phosphorylation in p cells caused by the accumulation of mutant mitochondrial dna . wolfram syndrome ( or the acronym didmoad ) describes patients with diabetes insipidus , diabetes mellitus , optical atrophy , and deafness . other endocrine and neurological abnormalities often are associated in this genetically and clinically heterogeneous syndrome . wolfram syndrome is frequently transmitted as an autosomal recessive disorder by a locus mapped to the short arm of chromosome 4. this gene , named wfsl , recently was identified . it encodes wolframin , a protein showing no perceptible homology to known dna or protein sequences . the physiological function of wolframin and its link to diabetes remain unclear . in contrast to this autosomal recessive transmission , a few cases of wolfram syndrome were found to be associated with mitochondrial dna mutations . candidate genes and polygenic forms of t2dm : the majority of the genes found to play a role in the common forms of t2dm have been identified by testing candidate genes , the most-used approach , up to now , to tackle the genetic determinants of t2dm . reasons for candidacy are numerous : 1 ) known or presumed biological function in glucose homeostasis or energy balance in humans ; 2 ) gene implicated in subtypes of diabetes ( e.g. , mody ) ; 3 ) gene associated with diabetes or associated traits in animal models ; 4 ) gene responsible for an inherited disease that includes diabetes ( e.g. , mitochondrial cytopathies , wolfram syndrome ) ; or 5 ) product differentially expressed in diabetic and normal tissues . for obvious reasons , the insulin gene was among the first genes to be studied . mutations in the coding regions of the insulin gene ( chromosome 1 lp ) have been reported in less than 10 families but are not consistently associated with t2dm . however , mutations in the promoter region could affect the regulation of the insulin gene , leading to a decrease of transcription and absolute or relative hypoinsulinemia . a variant allele of the promoter was observed in about 5 percent of african americans with t2dm and shown to be associated with decreased transcriptional activity . more recently , an association between t2dm and paternally transmitted class iii alleles of the variable region upstream of the insulin gene ( ins-vntr ) was observed in british families . interestingly , class iii alleles also were found to be associated with increased length and weight at birth and with a dominant protection against type 1 diabetes , as compared with type i alleles . the role of the mody genes and of other transcription factors in the development of the more-common forms of late-onset t2dm is still under investigation . regarding the mody genes , most studies have excluded a major role in the genetic determinants of t2dm . however , mutations in hnf-la were identified in african-american and japanese subjects with atypical non-autoimmune diabetes of acute onset . a common polymorphism in hnf- la was found to be associated with mild insulin secretion defects . moreover , mutations in hnf-4a and ipfl were identified in a few families with late-onset t2dm . several other transcription factors have been studied : a mutation in islet brain 1 ( ib 1 ) was found to be associated with diabetes in one family . ibl is a homologue of the c-jun amino-terminal kinase interacting protein 1 ( jip-i ) , which plays a role in the modulation of apoptosis . ib 1 is also a transactivator of the islet glucose transporter , glut2 the mutant ibl was found to be unable to prevent apoptosis in vitro . it is thus possible that the abnormal function of this mutant ibl may render l3 cells more susceptible to apoptotic stimuli , thus decreasing p-cell mass . as glucotoxicity and lipotoxicity are known to induce both apoptosis and transcription factor down regulation in pancreatic l3 cells , inherited or acquired limitations in ibl activity could have deleterious effects in p-cell function . on the other hand , mutations in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ( ppary ) that severely decrease the transactivation potential were found to co-segregate with extreme insulin resistance , diabetes , and hypertension in two families with autosomal dominant inheritance . interestingly , given the proposed role of ppary in adipogenesis , all affected family members had no evidence of lipoatrophy or abnormal fat distribution . all together , these data suggest that mutations in transcription factors may contribute to the genetic risk to t2dm through various mechanisms : 1 ) dysregulation of target genes involved in glucose or lipid metabolism ( i.e. , hnfs , ppar ? / , ipfl , ibl ) ; 2 ) abnormal p-cell development and differentiation ( i.e. , ipfl , neurodl/beta2 ) ; or 3 ) dysregulation of p-cell apoptosis ( ibl ) . deleterious mutations that significantly impair the transactivation activity of these transcription factors can be responsible in some families for monogenic-like forms of diabetes with late age of onset , which may represent an intermediary phenotype between mody and the most common forms of t2dm . other genes encoding key components of insulin secretion pathways were tested as potential candidates for a role in the genetic susceptibility of t2dm . the pancreatic p-cell atp-sensitive potassium channel ( ikatp ) plays a central role in glucose-induced insulin secretion by linking signals derived from glucose metabolism to cell membrane depolarization and insulin exocytosis ( dukes and philipson , 1996 ) . ikatp is composed of two distinct subunits : an inwardly rectifying ion channel forming the pore ( kir6.2 ) and a regulatory subunit , a sulfonylurea receptor ( surl ) belonging to the atp binding cassette ( abc ) superfamily . the genes encoding these two subunits are located 4.5 kb apart on human chromosome i 1 ~15.1 . mutations in each of these genes may result in familial persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy , demonstrating their role in the regulation of insulin secretion . studies in various populations with different ethnic backgrounds provided evidence for associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) in these genes with t2dm . however , sib-pair analyses in several populations indicated that the surlikir6.2 region is not a major diabetogenie locus . key components of the insulin-signaling pathways also were tested . they were at first thought to be important players in the context of the insulin resistance of t2dm . several of these genes are expressed in pancreatic p cells . recent results in knockout animals demonstrated that they also play an important role in the mechanisms of insulin secretion . more than 50 different mutations have been found in the coding regions of the insulin receptor gene on chromosome 19p . however , patients with these mutations seldom present with the common form of t2dm but rather with syndromes of severe insulin resistance associated with leprechaunism or with acanthosis nigricans , hirsutism , or major hyperinsulinemia . missense variants in the coding regions of the gene encoding the first substrate for the insulin receptor kinase ( irs-l ) on chromosome 2q have been detected in several populations . however , association of these variants with diabetes was not observed in all these studies . similarly , an association between polymorphisms of the muscle glycogen synthase gene ( gsy 1 ) on chromosome 19q and t2dm was observed in finnish and in japanese subjects but not in french ones . taken together , these results suggest that irs- 1 and gsy 1 genes might act in some populations as minor susceptibility genes , which are neither necessary nor sufficient for disease expression but may nevertheless modulate the phenotype of patients . other genes were shown to be implicated in the genetic susceptibility to insulin resistance . although they do not seem to be directly linked to or associated with t2dm , they could modulate the expression of diabetes . a common and widespread polymorphism at codon 905 of the gene encoding the glycogen-associated regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase-1 of the skeletal muscle was shown to be associated with insulin resistance and hypersecretion of insulin in danish t2dm subjects . a missense mutation in the intestinal fatty acid binding protein 2 ( fabp2 ) gene on chromosome 4q was found to be associated with increased fatty acid binding , increased fat oxidation , and insulin resistance in the pima indians of arizona , an ethnic group with the highest reported prevalence of t2dm and insulin resistance in the world . a point mutation in the gene encoding the beta-3 adrenergic receptor was found to be associated with an increased capacity to gain weight in a population of morbidly obese subjects . this same mutation was associated with reduced metabolic rate and early onset of diabetes and with the development of upper-body obesity and insulin resistance in two t2dm populations . positional cloning of t2dm : genes the candidate gene approach presents limitations , as it is now clear that at least some t2dm susceptibility genes are likely to code for proteins of unknown function or a function not obviously implicated in glucose metabolism . the genome-wide linkage approach attempts to locate these unknown genes by a systematic search throughout the genome . this consists of genotyping the entire genome of affected sib-pairs or families with panels of 250-300 anonymous polymorphic markers to identify regions showing excess of allele sharing with the disease . this total genome approach has been successful in other multifactorial diseases such as type 1 diabetes and obesity . more than 20 genome scans for t2dm are currently underway , involving thousands of pedigrees from different populations and ethnic groups . one of the limitations of the genome-scan approach is the relatively low power of the method , ( i.e. , inabilty to detect weak linkage signal ) , which is due to the low relative risk for diabetes in siblings ( about a 3- to 5-fold increase , compared to the general population ) . working on large family collections , in homogenous ethnic groups , or in large pedigrees using quantitative traits instead of the dichotomous diabetes status could improve the efficiency to detect linkage . moreover , because of the large number of markers that are tested , false-positive results are likely to occur . thus , stringent criteria for linkage ( p < 1o-5 ) need to be used to minimize the bias due to multiple testing . results of several genome scans already have been published , a locus for t2dm on chromosome 2q ( niddmi ) was localized in mexican americans . it showed that an interaction of this locus with a locus on chromosome 15 further increases the susceptibility to diabetes in this population . linkage was found at a locus near mody3 on chromosome 12q in finnish t2dm families characterized by a predominant insulin secretion defect . evidence for an obesity-diabetes locus on chromosome 1 lq23-q25 and linkage of several chromosomal regions with pre-diabetic traits were observed in pima indians , an ethnic group with a high prevalence of diabetes and obesity . a strong linkage between diabetes and chromosome 1 q2 1- 1 q23 was reported in multigenerational families of northern european ancestry from utah . linkages with diabetes and with the age at onset of diabetes were found in a region on chromosome 1oq in mexican american families from san antonio . evidence for the presence of one or more diabetes loci on chromo some 20 was found in different populations . in these and other studies , many loci showing only suggestive or weak indication of linkage with diabetes-related traits have been reported , several of which fall in overlapping regions . although many of these loci may represent false-positive results , some may harbor true diabetes-susceptibility genes . comparisons of linkage result in different populations or family collections and/or meta-analysis of the data may help to guide positional cloning efforts . new statistical methods exploiting multiloci effects or analyzing quantitative traits should permit researchers to squeeze more power from genome-scan data . these genome scans have mapped loci within large chromosomal regions containing lo-20 million nucleotides . now , the challenge is to identify the diabetes-related genes within this interval . the classical approach that consisted of building a physical map of the region through contiguous artificial chromosomes spanning the entire region of linkage , followed by the cloning of the gene , is limited by size of the regions of linkage . an integrated genomic approach might be needed . it would combine linkage disequilibrium mapping , to define more-precise gene locations , with techniques to pick out the genes of these smaller regions ( e.g. , microarrays for the identification of genes differentially expressed in diabetic and nondiabetic subjects ) . these investigations will benefit from recent technological developments in snp identification and genotyping . moreover , the results from the human genome project - which include genomic dna sequences , expressed sequences , and expression profile databanks -will certainly make easier the identification of t2dm-susceptibility genes by positional cloning . the recent identification by graeme bell and coworkers of niddml as the gene encoding calpain 10 ( capn lo ) , a nonlysosomal cysteine protease , demonstrates the feasibility of positional cloning of polygenic t2dm genes . currently , it is believed that less than 15 percent of the genetic determinants of t2dm have been unveiled . it is likely that other genes contributing to the genetic risk of t2dm will be shortly discovered . the identification of t2dm genes will improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that maintain glucose homeostasis and of the precise molecular defects leading to chronic hyperglycemia . a nosological classification of t2dm , based on primary pathophysiological mechanisms , will then be possible . this could lead to the development of more-specifically targeted antidiabetic drugs or even gene-based therapies . moreover , pharmacogenetic testing might then be used to predict for each patient the therapeutic response to different classes of drugs . the identification of t2dm genes also will provide the tools for the timely identification of high-risk individuals who might benefit from early behavioral or medical intervention to prevent the development of diabetes . an important reduction in diabetes-related morbidity and mortality could be then expected , along with a reduction in the costs of treatment of diabetes and its complications . risk factors for type diabetes being 40 years of age or older ; having a close relative ( parent or sibling ) who has type 2 diabetes ; being a member of a highrisk population , such as those of african , arab , asian , hispanic , indigenous or south asian descent , low socioeconomic status ; having a history of prediabetes ( impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose ; ) having some evidence of the complications of diabetes , such as eye , nerve or kidney problems ; having heart disease ; having a history of gestational diabetes mellitus ; having high blood pressure ; having high cholesterol ; being overweight , especially around your abdomen . having a history of giving birth to a baby that weighed over 4 kg ( 9 lb ) at birth ; having obstructive sleep apnea ; having a history of using glucocorticoid medication type 2 diabetes : the basics of type 2 diabetes : type 2 diabetes is a disease in which your pancreas does not produce enough insulin , or your body does not properly use the insulin it makes . as a result , sugar ( glucose ) builds up in your blood instead of being used for energy . your body gets sugar from foods like bread , potatoes , rice , pasta , milk and fruit . to use this sugar , your body needs insulin . insulin is a hormone that helps your body to control the level of sugar in your blood . the good news you can live a long and healthy life by keeping your blood sugar levels in the target range set by you and your healthcare provider . you can do this by : eating healthy meals and snacks enjoying regular physical activity monitoring your blood sugar using a home blood glucose meter aiming for a healthy body weight taking diabetes medications including insulin , if prescribed by your doctor managing stress effectively discuss with your healthcare provider how often you should measure your blood sugar level get the support you need a positive and realistic attitude towards your diabetes can help you manage it . talk to others who have diabetes . ask your local diabetes canada branch about joining a peer support group or taking part in an information session . who can help you ? your healthcare team is there to help you . depending on your needs and the resources available in your community , your team may include a family doctor , diabetes educator ( nurse and/or dietitian ) , endocrinologist , pharmacist , social worker , exercise physiologist , psychologist , footcare specialist , eyecare specialist . they can answer your questions about how to manage diabetes and work with you to adjust your food plan , activity and medications . remember , you are the most important member of your healthcare team complications of diabetes type 2 diabetes is a progressive , lifelong disease . it may become more difficult to keep your blood sugar levels within your target range . high blood sugar levels can cause complications such as blindness , heart disease , kidney problems , nerve damage and erectile dysfunction . fortunately , good diabetes care and management can prevent or delay the onset of these complications . you can reduce your chances of developing these complications if you : keep your blood sugar within your target range avoid smoking keep your cholesterol and other blood fats within your target range keep your blood pressure within your target range take care of your feet have regular visits with your doctor , diabetes team , dentist and eyecare specialist discuss your target ranges with your healthcare provider related articles : managing your blood sugar , managing weight and diabetes , physical activity and diabetes , just the basics ( tips for healthy eating ) , cholesterol and diabetes , high blood pressure and diabetes , smoking and diabetes , foot care : a step toward good health , and staying healthy with diabetes genetics of type 2 diabetes : type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) is the result of interaction between environmental factors and a strong hereditary component . very few t2d risk genes were identified using candidate gene and linkage-based studies , but the advent of genome-wide association studies has led to the identification of multiple genes , including several that were not previously known to play any role in t2d . highly replicated genes , for example tcf7l2 , kcnq1 and kcnj11 , are discussed in greater detail . taken together , the genetic loci discovered to date explain only a small proportion of the observed heritability . we discuss possible explanations for this �missing heritability� , including the role of rare variants , gene-environment interactions and epigenetics . the clinical utility of current findings and avenues of future research are also discussed . diabetes has been recognized as a distinct disease for over 2000 years , but it was not until 1935 that hinsworth established that there were two district types of diabetes . while both common types of diabetes are characterized by sustained elevations of plasma glucose levels , type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease that results in complete loss of the insulin-producing ? -cells in the pancreatic islets , while type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) typically results when insulin secretion from the islets fails to keep pace with increasing insensitivity to the action of circulating insulin on its target tissues ( particularly muscle , liver , and fat ) . the development of t2d is the result of interaction between environmental factors and a strong hereditary component . environmental risks factors known to impact the development of t2d include obesity , sedentary lifestyle , small or large birth weight and stress . other nutritional factors and toxins may also play a role . these environmental factors clearly play a major role in the development of diabetes , but they do not impact everyone in the same way . even with the same environmental exposures , some people are more susceptible to developing diabetes than others , and this increased risk appears to be inherited . but while hereditary factors clearly play a role in the development of diabetes , the actual genetic variants involved in this inherited risk were completely unknown prior to the advent of modern genetic technologies . the advance of human genetic studies in the 1980s finally made it possible to try and identify genetic loci that underlie this hereditary component . here , we will review the heritability of t2d and the various genetic loci identified to date as contributing to this heritability . heritability of t2d : estimates for the heritability of t2dm range from 20 % -80 % and evidence for heritability comes from a variety of population , family , and twin-based studies . the lifetime risk of developing t2d is 40 % for individuals who have one parent with t2d and 70 % if both parents are affected . first degree relatives of individuals with t2d are about 3 times more likely to develop the disease than individuals without a positive family history of the disease . the concordance rate in monozygotic twins is about 70 % whereas the concordance in dizygotic twins has been observed to be only 20 % -30 % . the observed familial risk is higher when studies are restricted to parents in the 35�60-year age range , indicating the greater role played by environmental factors in those who develop diabetes late in life . it should be noted that a significant proportion of this heritability reflects heritability of obesity rather than diabetes , obesity being a major driver of t2d in every population . this familial clustering of t2dm risk found in various family studies is not entirely due to genetic factors . epigenetic processes can produce inherited risk over one or several generations , intrauterine and pregnancy related factors can impact the risk of siblings , and shared environment can be hard to control for in many such studies . thus , the genetic component of t2d may turn out to be less than what was estimated in older studies . genetic architecture of t2dm disease risk : the detailed genetic architecture of t2d risk has not yet been precisely defined . a relatively small percentage ( 5 % or less ) of non-autoimmune diabetes is due to monogenic causes and is classified as monogenic diabetes of the young or mody ( previously referred to as maturity onset diabetes of the young ) . these cases are understood to be caused by single genes of high penetrance , of which mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a ( hnf1a ) and the glucokinase ( gck ) gene are the most common . these forms of diabetes are sometimes misdiagnosed as t2d but clinically they are distinct diseases . they will not be considered further in this review , but it should be kept in mind that the boundaries between polygenic and monogenic forms are not always sharply defined at the genetic level . polymorphisms in genes involved in monogenic forms of diabetes also play a role in polygenic t2d . t2d itself is thought to be a polygenic disorder that develops due to complex interaction between multiple genes and environmental factors . how these genes interact with each other and with the environment to produce t2d is still poorly understood . unlike t1d , where the genetic risk is mostly concentrated in the hla region , the genetic component of t2d risk is not concentrated in one region and appears to be the result of the interaction of multiple genes scattered all across the genome . it is possible ; even likely , that the genetic component of t2d is due to multiple common genetic variants of small effect ( common disease common variant hypothesis ) but this is by no means certain and it may turn out that the effect is due to multiple rare variants or even a few rare variants of large effect . identification of diabetes risk genes linkage studies linkage is the tendency for genes and other genetic markers to be inherited together because of their location near one another on the same chromosome . while linkage analysis is simple in principle , it has relatively poor resolution as only a few hundred markers were usually genotyped across the genome , and the regions identified by linkage could include millions of base pairs and hundreds of genes . while these methods were quite successful in detecting rare variants of large effect ( e.g. , classical single gene disorders ) , they proved relatively unsuccessful in identifying genes that are involved in complex polygenic disorders . these studies only revealed two genes , calpain 10 ( capn10 ) and transcription factor 7-like 2 ( t-cell specific , hmg-box ) ( tcf7l2 ) that were reliably identified as being associated with t2d . capn10 : capn10 encodes a cysteine protease that is part of the calpain family , a large family of ubiquitously expressed genes that play multiple roles in intracellular remodeling , post-receptor signaling and other intracellular functions . it became the first t2d gene to be discovered by linkage analysis when a locus on chromosome 2 was associated with t2d in 1996. initially the locus was labeled niddm1 but the gene ( or genes ) involved were not identified . in 2000 the causative gene was finally identified as capn10 . subsequent studies did not always confirm this finding but larger meta-analyses have shown that variants in capn10 are likely to be truly associated with t2d.at this time the function of this gene in glucose metabolism remains unknown and its link to t2d , while confirmed in several populations , is not always consistent . tcf7l2 : tcf7l2 was discovered as a t2d susceptibility gene after a strong linkage signal was mapped to chromosome 10q in a mexican american population . this region was later fine-mapped in the icelandic population and confirmed in united states and danish cohorts , where the risk locus was found to be located in intron 3 of the tcf7l2 gene . the association between t2d and a number of single-nucleotide polymorphisms ( snps ) in the tcf7l2 gene has since been strongly confirmed in multiple genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) in different ethnic groups and this gene remains the most replicated and most strongly associated t2d risk gene at this time . we will discuss this gene further in the gwas section of this review . candidate gene studies : in candidate gene studies , genes already suspected of playing a role in the pathogenesis of t2d were studied through focused sequencing efforts . the usual strategy was to focus on genes already known to be involved in glucose metabolism , insulin secretion , insulin receptors , post-receptor signaling and lipid metabolism . somewhat to the surprise of investigators , most of the genes known to be involved in insulin secretion and action were not found to be associated with t2d in the population . the relatively few genes that were found to be associated with t2d include peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ( pparg ) , insulin receptor substrate 1 ( irs1 ) and irs-2 , potassium inwardly-rectifying channel , subfamily j , member 11 ( kcnj11 ) , wolfram syndrome 1 ( wolframin ) ( wfs1 ) , hnf1 homeobox a ( hnf1a ) , hnf1 homeobox b ( hnf1b ) and hnf4a . other genes including rapgef1 and tp53 were identified using an algorithm that prioritizes candidate genes for complex human traits based on trait-relevant functional annotation but have not been consistently replicated in later studies . pparg : pparg gene was an attractive candidate gene for t2d because it encodes the molecular target of thiazolidenediones , a commonly used class of anti-diabetic medications . it was found that a proline to arginine change at position 12 in the pparg gene led to a 20 % increase in the risk of diabetes . this finding has since been confirmed in some other populations and other polymorphisms in this gene have been found to play a role in some cases of diabetes . even so , the significance of these mutations was not replicated in all populations and the contribution of these polymorphisms to the worldwide prevalence of diabetes remains low . irs1 and irs-2 : insulin receptor substrate irs-1 and irs-2 genes encode peptides that play an important role in insulin signal transduction . polymorphisms in these genes were found to be associated with decreased insulin sensitivity in some populations but as with other candidate genes , the role played by these polymorphisms in the global burden of diabetes and related insulin-resistance disorders like pcos remains small . kcnj11 : kcnj11 gene encodes the kir6.2 atp-sensitive potassium channel that plays an important role in the regulation of insulin secretion by beta cells . activating mutations in this gene are a well-established cause of neonatal diabetes . a missense polymorphism in kcnj11 was found to be associated with t2d and confirmed in subsequent studies . the odds ratio of developing t2d is about 1.2 in carriers of the risk allele and this allele was also found to be associated with decreased insulin secretion in different populations . wfs-1 : wfs-1 gene encodes wolframin , a protein that is defective in individuals suffering from the wolfram syndrome ( characterized by diabetes insipidus , juvenile diabetes , optic atrophy , and deafness ) . wfs1 gene appears to be involved in beta cell function and 2 snps in wfs-1 were found to be significantly associated with t2d in a large case-control study involving about 24000 samples . this was subsequently confirmed in other studies in different populations . these studies provided evidence that beta cell dysfunction plays a critical role in the development of t2d and pointed out novel genes that play a previously unknown role in beta cell survival and function , but their role in the global burden of diabetes remains minor . hnf1a , hnf1b and hnf4a : hnf1a , hnf1b and hnf4a are all known mody genes ( i.e. , genes that harbor rare high penetrance mutations that cause monogenic diabetes of the young ) . these genes play a role in the development of the liver , in the regulation of hepatic metabolic functions , and in the development and functioning of beta cells . variants in these genes that do not lead to mody have been found to be associated with decreased insulin secretion and an increase in the risk of t2d in various populations , but as with other candidate genes , their role in worldwide diabetes prevalence appears to be relatively small . genome wide association studies candidate gene studies and linkage analysis identified a few t2d risk genes , but their overall contribution to the observed heritability of t2d remained small and it was clear that other techniques were needed to look for variants that were not easily identified by these methods . with the development of high-throughput snp genotyping technology and the availability of hapmap data , it became possible to scan hundreds of thousands of snps that were in linkage disequilibrium with millions of snps across the genome . tcf7l2 , already identified via linkage studies , was the most significant and most replicated signal found in gwas studies , but these studies also helped to identify scores of other genetic loci that appear to be linked to t2d . over the last 6 years , the number of known t2d variants has risen to over 60 ; including confirmation of variants identified earlier by candidate gene and linkage studies . while most studies have focused on europid populations , this is being rectified as more studies of asian , african and other populations become available . since obesity is a major contributor to the development of t2d , genes that increase the risk of obesity also show up in gwas for t2d . these include some frequently replicated genes include like fto and mc4r ; these genes seem to primarily impact obesity risk and effect t2d risk mostly via their effect on obesity ( though fto may have a small but detectable influence on t2d risk independent of the risk of obesity ) . here we will focus on genes that specifically increase the risk of t2d independent of obesity . the most important of these include tcf7l2 : this remains the most significant and consistently replicated gene linked to t2d . it was initially discovered by linkage studies , then confirmed in the very first large-scale gwas study conducted in a french population by sladek et al . this publication was followed in quick succession by several other major gwas paper , including the landmark welcome trust study that genotyped 2000 individuals with t2d along with 3000 controls and found that tcf7l2 was the most robust t2d signal , with an odds ratio of 1.36 for carriers heterozygous for the risk allele . this finding was then replicated in almost every human population studied and remains the most robust t2d risk gene identified to date . carriers of the various identified risk alleles have an or of 1.4 [ 49 ] and homozygotes may have an or of 2.5. tcf7l2 encodes a transcription factor that is a member of the wnt signaling pathway and is known to be active in the beta cells . studies in multiple ethnicities indicate that the risk allele is present in intron 3 of the tc-f7l2 gene . an early investigation revealed that the risk alleles increased the level of tcf7l2 protein in beta cells and was associated with impaired insulin secretion , incretin effects and enhanced rate of hepatic glucose production . tcf7l2 expression in human islets were increased 5-fold in t2d , particularly in homozygotes and overexpression of tcf7l2 in human islets reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion . these findings were replicated in several subsequent studies , indicating that tcf7l2 probably plays a role in causation of t2d by decreasing insulin secretion from beta cells , perhaps by altering the action of incretins that modulate the insulin response to meals . other studies indicate that alternative splicing of this gene can lead to the production of different isoforms in different tissues and the presence of specific isoforms in adipose tissue may be related to insulin sensitivity in that tissue . it is also possible that t2d risk is conferred by multiple mechanisms , including decreased beta cell insulin response and decreased insulin sensitivity in target tissues like adipose tissue . a recent murine study shows that , at least in mice , when tcf7l2 is knocked out in liver cells it leads to hypoglycemia and when it is overexpressed it causes hyperglycemia , but there is no effect when it is knocked out in the beta cells . this indicates that the liver may also be an important site where tcf7l2 variants influence glucose metabolism . finally , there are indications that this gene may play a role in cancer as well as in diabetes . thus , the discovery of its association with diabetes has opened several new avenues of research and should eventually lead to the characterization of previously unknown physiological mechanisms that play a role in both diabetes and cancer . hhex : hematopoietically expressed homeobox ( hhex ) while tcf7l2 remains the strongest t2d signal in gwas studies from across the globe , several other genes have been repeatedly identified in different populations as being associated with t2d . hhex was identified as one such gene in multiple studies in both caucasian and asian populations . located on chromosome 10q , this gene is also a member of the homeobox family and encodes a transcription factor involved in wnt signaling . risk alleles appear to confer an or of developing t2d of 1.5. the mechanism by which this gene confers diabetes risk remains poorly understood . slc30a8 : solute carrier family 30 ( zinc transporter ) , member 8 ( slc30a8 ) . this gene encodes for a protein that is involved in the storage and secretion of insulin granules and that is expressed at a high level only in the pancreas , particularly in the islets of langerhans . this provides an obvious mechanism by which it may be involved in conferring t2d risk and this association has been replicated in multiple studies in different populations . interestingly , this gene has also been found to be associated with the development and progression of type 1 diabetes though this has not been confirmed in all studies [ 64 ] . cdkn2a/b : cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2a/ b ( cdkn2a/b ) . snps located upstream of the cdkn2a2b genes have been associated with the risk of t2d in multiple large gwas . these genes are located on chromosome 9p21 and generate several transcript variants . at least three alternatively spliced variants of cdkn2a encoding distinct proteins have been reported , two of which are known to function as inhibitors of cdk4 kinase . cdkn2b is also located in the same region and generates at least 2 splice variants . both genes are important cell cycle regulators with a role in tumor suppression . this region was found to be associated with t2d in multiple gwas studies in different populations and it is estimated that the risk alleles confer an odds ratio for development of t2d of between 1.2 and 1.5. how variations in these genes alter diabetes risk remains unclear but recent research points to a role in insulin secretion rather than insulin action . these variants also show up in gwas for cardiovascular disease , in particular for atherosclerosis , but the mechanism underlying this association remains unknown . igf2bp2 : insulin-like growth factor 2 mrna binding protein 2 ( igf2bp2 ) encodes a protein that binds to the 5� utr of the insulin-like growth factor 2 ( igf2 ) mrna and thereby regulates igf2 translation . alternate transcriptional splice variants , encoding different isoforms , have been characterized . this gene has been found to be associated with t2d risk in multiple gwas . as with other variants like hhex and cdkn2a/b , it may play a role in beta cell function but the mechanism by which it influences t2d risk remains largely unknown . other genes linked to t2d risk include cdkal1 ( cdk5 regulatory subunit associated protein 1-like 1 ) , hmga2 ( high mobility group at-hook 2 ) , kcnq11 ( potassium voltage gated channel , kqt like subfamily , member 1 ) and notch2-adam30 ( notch 2-adam metallopeptidase domain 30 ) . their exact role in the pathophysiology of t2d remains mostly unknown . the odds ratios for individual risk alleles are generally less than 1.3 ( tcf7l2 and kcnq1 being the most prominent exceptions ) and it has been estimated that all the risk alleles identified to date can only explain about 10 % of the observed heritability of t2d . thus , these alleles can not be used to estimate the genetic risk of developing t2d in an individual patient with any degree of certainty since a simple family history will be much more informative than a detailed genotype at this point . but the discovery of these genes has opened entirely new avenues in our quest to understand the regulation of glucose metabolism and the development of t2d . for example , prior to these genetic studies , no one could have predicted that tcf7l2 plays any role in glucose regulation . but initially via linkage studies , and then in multiple gwas , it has been shown to be the single most significantly associated diabetes risk gene in the world . this has led to intensive investigation of its physiological role and though those investigations are at an early stage , it is hoped that they will eventually yield a new and more complete understanding of the mechanisms that regulate insulin secretion and action and whose alteration may lead to an increased risk for t2d . that in turn may lead to the identification of new drug targets , diagnostic tests , and targeted therapies ( pharmacogenomics ) . what do these genes do ? the fact that many of these genes are active in beta cells or may be involved in insulin secretion support the notion that beta cell dysfunction is a crucial final step on the path to diabetes . very few of these genes seem to play a role in insulin sensitivity ( though that may change as more information becomes available ) and genes involved in the insulin signaling pathway rarely show up in t2d gwas studies . when indices of beta-cell function ( homa-b ) and insulin sensitivity ( homa-ir ) derived from paired fasting glucose and insulin measures from 37000 individuals were used to try and identify the function most affected by various t2d risk genes , it was found that risk alleles at ten loci ( mtnr1b , slc30a8 , thada , tcf7l2 , kcnq1 , camk1d , cdkal1 , igf2bp2 , hnf1b and centd2 ) were associated ( p < 0.05 ) with reduced beta-cell function , and only three loci ( pparg , fto and klf14 ) were associated with reduced insulin sensitivity . it is possible that this may be because rare variants have a greater impact on insulin sensitivity or because environmental factors play a greater role in altering insulin sensitivity and thus swamp underlying genetic variation in risk . still , this finding was not expected when candidate gene studies were initiated and shows how agnostic high throughput methods like gwas can help to generate novel hypotheses and illuminate new aspects of biology . some of the genes found to be associated with t2d also appear to be linked to dyslipidemia , atherosclerotic heart disease and cancer and it is possible that as we learn more about the role of these genes , we may be able to understand more about the relationship between t2d and other components of the metabolic syndrome as well as cancer . gene-environment interactions : it is abundantly clear that the risk of developing t2d is heavily influenced by environmental factors . since our genetic code does not change significantly in one or two generations , the recent secular trend in diabetes must be due mostly to changes in the environment . increased adiposity is the single most significant factor in the development of t2d and the epidemics of obesity and t2d largely parallel one another . the increasing prevalence of obesity is thought to be related primarily to changes in dietary habits and our increasingly sedentary lifestyle , though other factors ( including toxins and infectious agents ) may play a role . genes may influence the risk of diabetes not only by directly altering insulin action or secretion , but also by altering how any given individual interacts with these environmental factors . even within the same broad environment , individuals vary greatly in their adoption of unhealthy lifestyles and their willingness to change such lifestyles . by influencing who adopts a more unhealthy diet ( this includes genetic influence on taste and food preferences ) , who exhibits greater willingness to change unhealthy behaviors , who burns more calories at rest , who exhibits greater activity levels when not actively exercising , what kind of microbiome an individual carries , and who opts for a more sedentary lifestyle , genetic factors can play a role in determining who becomes obese or develops diabetes in any given environment . these gene-environment interactions may be extremely complex and may be one reason why such a small proportion of the heritability of t2d has been explained at this time . epigenetics epigenetics refers to heritable changes in gene function that occur without a change in nucleotide sequence . mechanisms like dna-methylation , histone acetylation and non-coding rnas are used by the cell to regulate gene expression in response to environmental cues and can persist for an individual�s lifetime and can be passed on over 2-3 generations . it is well known that the maternal environment and early infancy can alter the lifelong risk of chronic diseases . for example , infants who are born small for gestational age are at an increased risk for the development of obesity and t2d as adults . some or most of this risk may be due to epigenetic changes in critical genes and animal experiments and initial human studies suggest that such mechanisms may indeed explain the impact of intrauterine nutrition and birth weight of future risk of diabetes , obesity and metabolic syndrome . it is thus possible that some of the observed heritability of t2d is due to epigenetic changes during intra-uterine life that are the result of maternal environmental influences , rather than inherited variations in the dna sequence . as our understanding of epigenetics advances and as the ability to profile genome-wide dna methylation and other epigenetic mechanisms becomes more widely used , we are likely to see important discoveries regarding the epigenetic changes that alter the risk of t2d . epigenetic profiling may also help to identify novel genes that play a role in the pathogenesis of t2d just as gwas led to the identification of multiple genes that were previously unsuspected of having a role in diabetes . risk prediction based on genetic information while we know that a person�s future risk of developing t2d has a significant heritable component and believe that most of this inherited risk is associated with particular genotypic features ( in most cases , multiple variants of small effect ) , and have identified several risk variants in genome-wide association studies , these variants still explain a relatively small proportion of the observed heritability . several studies have found that a risk score based on traditional risk factors ( bmi , family history , age , sex , hdl , triglycerides , etc . ) consistently outperforms any set of genetic markers and the addition of known genetic markers does not significantly improve prediction based on traditional risk factors . this indicates that our current state of knowledge regarding specific genetic markers is still incomplete and fails to explain most of the inherited risk . but as more data becomes available and better statistical techniques are applied to analyze gene-gene and gene-environment interactions , this predictive ability is likely to improve . even before that happens , these genetic discoveries have already provided important new insights into the pathophysiology of t2d and as the physiologic role of these genes in glucose regulation becomes clearer , these discoveries can be expected to lead to better diagnostic and therapeutic tools . potential applications are not limited to better risk prediction , new drug targets and better targeted drug therapy ; some time in the future when our technologies have improved far beyond current levels , they may include the ability to alter the risk of diabetes using gene therapy or epigenetic reprogramming . the risk factors of diabetes can be grouped into 2 1. those that can not be modified a. advancing age b. family history of diabetes 2. those that are modifiable a. overweight and obesity b. alcohol use c. tobacco use d. physical inactivity e. a stressful lifestyle f. unhealthy diet diagnosis diagnosis of diabetes in the majority of people presenting with the classical symptoms of diabetes , the diagnosis is straightforward . a fasting blood sugar level of more than 7m mol/l is diagnostic ( fasting means a person has not eaten overnight or for the last 8 hour ) a random blood sugar of more than 11.1mmol/l is diagnostic of diabetes . ( a random blood sugar of between 7.1m mol/l and 11.1m mol/l refer to hospital to confirm diagnosis ) . the goal of diabetes management is to improve the quality of life and productivity of people living with diabetes . there are two modalities of managing diabetes . ( diabetes education goes hand in hand with these two methods ) . non drug method ( use of proper diet and physical activity ) . use of drugs e.g . diabetes tablets for lowering blood sugar and insulin 1. education community members including people living with diabetes need to know : that diabetes is a serious lifelong disease that has no cure , but can be controlled . the pillars of management include : knowing what foods to eat , how much and how often to eat , knowing the importance and precautions of exercise , how and when to take diabetes medications that community should know and be encouraged to seek regular medical checkups which is essential for early detection of the disease people with diabetes need to know how to identify diabetes related emergencies arising from low or high blood sugar levels and when to seek medical help . pregnant mothers to be encouraged to check their blood sugars regularly . complications of diabetes are preventable . good blood sugar control is essential to prevent long term complications of diabetes . that people with diabetes have to look after their feet to prevent injuries and thus prevent ulcers and amputations . eating a healthy diet and increasing the level of physical activity should be the first steps in the management of newly diagnosed people with diabetes , and have to be maintained . good dietary practices in the management of diabetes mellitus appropriate diet and physical activity is important in maintaining an ideal body weight . reduced intake of animal fat , salt , and refined foods is recommended . locally available foods high in fiber , vegetables and fruits should be encouraged in the community the nutritionist or a trained diabetes educator can help you know the appropriate food portion sizes to meet your dietary requirement . eat a variety of foods in at-least three meals a day . alcohol and tobacco products use should be avoided . water is essential for normal body functioning . at-least eight glasses of water should be taken per day . physical activity regular physical activity helps in ; increasing insulin sensitivity thus improving blood sugar control , controlling blood pressure , improving blood flow in the heart and vessels , weight loss and maintenance of healthy body weight , giving one a sense of well-being . physical activity should be regular ( 3 days/week ) , lasting at least 20-30 min . per session , and be of at least moderate intensity . examples of physical activities you can involve yourself include ; housework , gardening , walking , climbing stairs . examples of exercises you can involve yourself include fast walking , cycling , jogging , playing games , weightlifting , rope jumping , swimming , indoor exercises e.g sit ups and press ups . activities like walking , climbing steps ( instead of taking lifts ) should be encouraged . people with diabetes require proper medical assessment before engaging in vigorous physical activity proper shoes must always be worn during exercises to avoid injury to the feet . diabetes is managed by use of medicines that can either be : oral blood sugar lowering tablets , insulin injection it is important to note that ; oral tablets are used when an individuals blood sugar control is not achieved using the combination of dietary modifications and physical activity/exercise . patients currently using tablets to control their blood sugar may at one time in the future need insulin as these tablets may no longer work in them . in some cases , oral tablets or insulin injection may be given at the time of diagnosis of diabetes if the blood sugar is extremely high . i.e . a fasting blood glucose level more than 11 mmol/lor random blood glucose level more than 15 mmol/l . individuals with type 1 diabetes must be on insulin for survival . principles of insulin administration the injection sites most commonly used for insulin are the abdomen , the thigh , and the outer upper arm . the rate of absorption is fastest on the abdomen . the thigh should be avoided as an injection site when exercise is going to be done , as this will increase the rate of absorption of the insulin . one area should be used for an injection at a particular time of day , e.g . the abdomen is the site for the morning injection , and the thigh is the site for the evening injection . within these areas , the injection site is to be rotated . to avoid formation of a hard scar ( seen as a lump ) injection on these scars should be avoided as insulin absorption is not predictable the injection should be done at a 90-degree angle with the skin using the recommended insulin administration syringe and needle . the needle should be held in place for 10 seconds after injection before withdrawal . early diagnosis of diabetes , good management and regular screening for complications can do much to reduce the burden that complications can impose on people living with diabetes and the health care system . diabetes complications are divided into two broad groups 1. short term complications 2. long term complications short term complications hypoglycemia ( low blood sugar ) occurs when the blood sugar is too low ; less than 3.5mmols/l it requires immediate treatment . causes : skipping or delaying meals , wrong timings of medication , eating inadequate meal portions , drug overdose , side effect of medication , unplanned and excessive , alcohol intake physical activity signs and symptoms : dizziness , confusion , weakness , reduced concentration , cold , sweaty skin , nervousness , profuse sweating , fast heartbeat , hunger , headache , irritability , numbness of tongue and mouth , bad dreams , fainting and loss of consciousness . prevention and treatment of hypoglycemia ( low blood sugar ) when the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia are noted , eat or drink a fast acting sugar e.g 3 teaspoons of sugar or honey ( can be dissolved in water ) , 3 sweets , 3 biscuits or 3/4 cup of juice or soda . then eat a meal . in case of unconscious person do not give fluids or food . instead apply moistened sugar or honey on the inner cheek lining ( not on the tongue ) if symptoms persist or recur refer to the hospital . prevention of hypoglycemia avoid skipping or delaying meals eat adequate food portions use medications as prescribed ( dosage and timing ) avoid alcohol use avoid unplanned and excessive physical activity note : the patient should always carry some sugar source ( e.g . 3 sweets , 3 biscuits or a light meal ) the patient should always carry or wear an identification tag/bracelet/card stating that they have diabetes . a note on hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) in case the blood sugar remains persistently high despite following the healthcare workers instructions on medication , please refer the patient urgently to see the nearest health facility . prevention and management long term complications of diabetes poorly controlled blood sugar can lead to long term complications of diabetes . long term complications arise due to damage of the blood vessels resulting in ; 1. diseases of the large blood vessels ( affects the brain and heart ) 2. diseases of the small blood vessels and nerves ( affects the eyes , kidneys , sexual organs and feet ) diabetes and the brain a person with diabetes is at higher risk for stroke than the general population . persistently elevated blood sugar levels contribute to the buildup of deposits in blood vessels thus leading to impaired blood flow or complete blockage and subsequently stroke . diabetes and the eye uncontrolled diabetes damages the small blood vessels at the back of the eye that enables one to see leading to poor vision and eventually to blindness . people with poorly controlled diabetes develops cataract at an earlier age than others . diabetes and the heart high blood sugar levels over time can lead to deposits causing the narrowing and the hardening of blood vessels that supply oxygen to the heart . therefore flow of blood to the heart can slow down or stop causing a heart attack . heart disease is the leading cause of death for people with diabetes . diabetes and the kidney high blood sugar can overwork the kidneys causing them to stop working properly and cause them to leak protein in the urine leading to kidney failure in the long run . diabetes and the sexual function poorly controlled diabetes damages nerves and blood vessels which are important for functioning of sexual organs . in women it may cause reduced urge to sex and painful intercourse . in men , it may cause impotence and erectile dysfunction . this increases with age and has a major psychological impact . uncontrolled diabetes can lead to nerve damage or poor blood supply to the feet and can lead to wounds on the feet which can get infected which if untreated can lead to amputation ( cutting of the leg ) . the dos of diabetes foot management 1. wash your feet regulary and dry between the toes 2. cut nails straight with a nail cutter and file the sharp edges 3. examine your feet daily , using a mirror or use an assistant 4. seek medical attention for bruises , cuts or blisters 5. examine your shoes daily for any foreign objects 6. moisturize your feet using creams or lotions ( avoid petroleum based jelly ) 7. test bathing water with your elbow before washing your feet to avoid burns 8. wear loose absorbent socks 9. shoes should be : closed and well-fitting fastened with laces or velcro wide enough to accommodate the toe bought in the afternoon as feet tend to swell towards the evening the don ’ ts of diabetes foot management 1. avoid walking bare foot 2. avoid smoking as it can harm blood circulation in your feet 3. avoid touching hot surfaces 4. avoid shoes with high heels and pointed toes . 5. avoid open shoes or sandals 6. avoid warming your feet in front of open fire 7. avoid wearing tight shoes without proper support and eat healthy foods : more vegetables and fruits , less carbohydrates , fats , sugars and salts ; exercise regularly : at least 30 minutes of brisk walking every day will do you good . take the stairs not the lift . walk short distances ; dont board a vehicle encourage children to have daily physical exercises . avoid smoking , if a smoker seeks assistance to quit smoking ; avoid harmful use of alcohol : excessive use of alcohol is dangerous to health ; its good to know you are healthy ; visit your nearest health facility for checkups for diabetes and blood pressure . early diagnosis and proper treatment prevents complications of diabetes ; dontwait until you are feeling unwell ; check your body mass index ( bmi ) : this is the ration of weight in kg/height in meters 2 for example : if your weight is 75kg and height is 154cm bmi=75/ ( 1.54 ) 2 =75/2.3716=31.6 less than 18.5 underweight 18.5-24.9 normal 25-29.9 overweight 30+ above obese . myths and misconceptions about diabetes the following are some of the misconceptions and myths regarding diabetes in kenya ; myth : diabetes is a disease of the rich fact : diabetes knows no boundaries and affects all the people across the board . myth : diabetes is the result of eating too much sugar fact : diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body . however , taking too much sugar may lead to obesity and overweight that are risk factors for developing diabetes . myth : only older people get diabetes fact : diabetes knows no boundaries and affects all the people across the board . despite older people being at a higher risk of developing diabetes , younger people also need to take precaution . myth : diabetes gets cured after a while fact : diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body . the damaged cells can not be brought back to life . once an individual develops diabetes , he/she shall need lifelong treatment that ranges from diet , exercises and or with drugs . myth : if you look fat/obese you are healthy despite having diabetes fact : obesity/overweight is a predisposing factor for diabetes . to avoid developing diabetes , you should maintain a healthy weight . myth : diabetes is the result of a curses/witchcraft fact : diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body . myth : diabetes is cured through prayers since it is brought on by evil spirits fact : diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body . spiritual support enhances good control of blood sugar . myth : traditional healers can cure diabetes using nutritional and herbal supplements fact : diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body . diabetes has no cure and can only be controlled by a combination of diet , exercises or drugs . myth : alternative therapy preferred over scientific therapy . fact : diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body . diabetes has no cure and can only be controlled by a combination of diet , exercises or drugs . myth : having diabetes means eating different foods from others . fact : people with diabetes don ’ t need to follow a restricted diet but instead should follow the same healthy eating guidelines as every person in the community which can be provided by a nutritionist in your local health facility . wagner et al . reported that increased pancreatic steatosis interacted with decreased insulin secretion . interestingly , wagner et al . performed sensitivity analyses across the 5 clusters of t2 addened by udler et al . and found that the interaction was driven by a pprs dening the liver metabolism/nafld gene cluster . finally , recent work using a pprs for lipodystrophy found that despite having lower bmi/waist circumference , those with a higher lipodystrophy pprs had significantly higher insulin resistance and low-density lipoprotein , portending possible increased cvd risk in this specific subpopulation . further work will be needed to elucidate the relationship between pprs and risk prediction/stratification in the clinical context . genetics and the potential for tailored therapy in t2d . examples from published reports that exemplify different physiological/molecular mechanisms and showcase how researchers move from gwas signal to a molecular mechanism . werst highlight colocalization : a method through which investigators can ne-map hundreds-to- thousands of gwas signals in a genetic region to the likely causal variant . colocalization can identify causal variants/genes , prioritizing translation . A powerful way to identify effector transcripts at gwas loci is to identify colocalization of association signals for disease risk and gene expression . colocalization of genetic signals is generally performed using summary-level statistics from gwas for disease ( eg , t2d ) and gwas for expression quantitative trait loci ( eqtl ) data , though any other type of genome- wide study data could also be used in colocalization methods ( ie , dna methylation data , histone methylation data , and so on ) . eqtl data rejects genome-wide variant associations with individual gene expression levels within a specific is supercell type ( eg , pancreatic islet ) . eqtls can be detected in multiple tissues ; however , working with disease-relevant tissues is the preferred approach , because eqtls are frequently tissue-specific . many genes are highly dependent on context-specificity , with their expression levels dependent on a combination of cell type , environmental perturbation ( eg , starvation vs hyperglycemia ) , and/or epigenome structure . in particular , epigenetics has become a focus in the last decade with mounting evidence that aging and dis- ease alter the physical structure of dna , potentially limiting gene expression even in cases where the context speci city is otherwise met . in this context , methods such as chromatin segregation to highlight the active and repressed regions of dna represent promising avenues through which to integrate many data sources and identify effector transcripts . identifying colocalization of a t2d gwas signal and an eqtl in a diabetes-relevant tissue , such as pancreatic islets , offers evidence for a potential causal link ( and thereby identities the effector transcript ) . in this causal relationship , the genetic variant influences pancreatic islet gene expression , which in turn affects t2d risk . in addition to the gtex database , recent publications of eqtl data for skeletal muscle , adipose , and pancreatic islet tissue have contributed to deciphering possible mechanistic links for t2d gwas variants . Examples of translation of t2d gwas signals into understanding of molecular mechanism/pathogenesis . the early identification of 2 independent coding variant signals in the pam gene for t2d risk provided a molecular signpost to the effector transcript ( ie , strongly implicating pam as the causal gene ) , accelerating efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms of pam . further work highlighted the association of pam with both t2d and beta-cell function . thomsen et al . reported that both coding alleles in the pam protein result in a loss of function , reducing the ability of this a misdating enzyme to increase the biological potency of glycine-extended neuropeptides . loss of pam in a human beta-cell model resulted in reduced insulin content and secretion , an effect also observed in isolated primary islets from carriers of the pam t2d-risk allele . even when the effector transcript and the tissue of effect are known , there can still be challenges . the slc30 a8 locus provides an example of the complexity . early gwas for t2d identified a nonsynonymous coding allele in slc30 a8 associated with t2d risk ; however , whether t2d risk was associated with loss vs gain-of-function in the gene was unclear from early functional and rodent studies , but human genetic evidence provided compelling support that loss-of-function in slc30 a8 was associated with diabetes protection . a recent study , combining detailed physiological characterization in human carrier soft the slc30 a8 loss-of- function variants coupled with cellular studies in a suite of human beta-cell models , demonstrated that the slc30 a8 t2 d-protective alleles cause enhanced insulin secretion . tm6 sf2 was rst identified as a missense variant ( hence identifying tm6 sf2 as the likely effector transcript ) that caused low low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ( ldl-c ) but paradoxically increased nafld risk . several groups found that tm6 sf2 was primarily expressed by the liver , and congruent work by smagris et al . and mahdessian et al . found that the likely mechanism of action for tm6 sf2 was through impaired very-low density lipoprotein release from the liver , leading to nafld via fat accumulation but also lower ldl-cin serum . subsequent work supports this proposed mechanism and has found that tm6 sf2 is associated with incident t2d , and in g that is supported by large- scale gwas that later identified tm6 sf2 as a t2d risk locus.a locus containing fto has long been associated with obesity , and fto knockout in mice reduces bmi . however , recent evidence suggests that fto is not the causal gene at this locus . the t2d risk allele in the locus increased both irx3 and irx5 gene expression . adding further weight to these convincing human studies , irx3 knockout mice recapitulated the prior fto knockout phenotype : they had substantially reduced body weight and increased brown adipose tissue , suggesting that irx3 , rather than fto , is the causal gene causing obesity and increased t2d/cvd risk . the example of fto/ irx3 illustrates the complexity in untangling the molecular mechanism of t2d gwas variants that are regulatory in nature , and highlights the importance of context ( correct tissue , at the right developmental time point , and with appropriate environmental conditions ) . mr is a powerful technique that leverages the random assortment of alleles during meiosis to assess potential causality between snv genotype and outcomes . an adverse drug reaction ( adr ) is also identified via an association with bacterial sepsis , warranting caution in prescribing inhibitor . 2 nonsense mutations in pcsk9 that resulted in drastically lower ldl-c , spurring drug development of pcsk9 inhibitors . a subsequent mr study demonstrated that loss-of-function variants in pcsk9 were associated with decreased ldl-c and cvd , suggesting a causal pathway . concurrent to this mr study , pcsk9 inhibition was found to reduce both ldl-cand cvd events . Mr can also be done at large-scale , allowing for rapid screening of multiple candidates for potential drug development . for example , folkersen et al . recently reported on genetic variants in sequencing 90 serum protein levels ( a protein quantitative trait loci pqtl study ) and performed an mr study that implicated a causal role for rage protein in t2d , whereby a ger ( the gene encoding rage ) snvs caused higher rageprotein levels and subsequent lower t2d risk . of note , their mr analysis did not need evidence of an association with alzheimers disease , for which a rage inhibitor had previously been studied . this study , in conjunction with prior work on pcsk9 inhibition , demonstrates the utility of mr in identifying novel drug targets and validating drugs under development . although classically described for snv alleles , mr can also be used to assess if a given pprs is causally associated with an outcome via an intermediate phenotype . for example , sanna et al . used a pprs for propionate , a fecal short-chain fatty acid , and found that the pprs was associated with both increased propionate levels and increased t2d risk . these results suggested that genetically controlled propionate levels were causally linked with differential t2d risk.similarly , sinnott-armstrong et al . leveraged deep phenotyping with protein and urine biomarkers to demonstrate causal relationships across many traits and diseases , including highlighting an emerging causal role for decreased ldl-c and increased t2d risk . phenome-wide association studies to identify potential non-label use for existing drugs . anal genetic tool that has broad relevance in drug repurposing and identification of potential adverse reactions is the phenome-wide association study ( phewas ) . a phewas inverts the study design of a gwas : a single snv is tested for association with multiple phenotypes , most commonly through the use of international classification of disease-10th revision codes in emr data . through such large-scale snv-disease associations , investigators can identify off -target effects ( otes ) that may represent targets for drug repurposing and also potential adverse drug reactions . however , after identification of an ote , further investigation must central illustration disentangling t2d pathogenic mechanisms , leading to precision medicine . partitioned polygenic risk scores ( pprs ) can identify the intermediate phenotypes that are driving t2d pathogenesis in a specific patient . with further research ( preferably with randomization concurrent with clinical implementation ) , we aim to develop an evidence base similar to that with monogenic diabetes s that tailors prevention/treatment strategies based upon a specific patient s genetics and pprs-identified pathologic pathways . b-cell pancreatic beta cell be undertaken to ensure that the direction of effect for the snv-disease association is consistent with beneficence . for example , although tm6 sf2 is associated with decreased ldl-c and cvd , it is concomitantly associated with increased nafld . as an example of phe was , cai et al . recently analyzed an il6 rsnv and found a significant association with abdominal aortic aneurysm , representing a possible ote . tocilizumab , an il-6 r antagonist , has since been approved for use in giant cell arteritis , of which a significant complication is aortic aneurysm . moreover , cai et al . found that decreased il-6 r levels were associated with increased risk of adverse drug reactions , eczema , conjunctivitis , and pleuritis , consistent with trial data for tocilizumab . these results offer a glimpse into the power of phewas for drug discovery and repurposing in t2d , as well as in identifying the likely side-effect profile of a given agent . Future directions for research into the genetics of t2d precision medicine for t2d using gprs/pprs . gprs can be used to risk-stratify patients , enabling earlier interventions and prevention of t2d patho-genesis and complications . we envision that gprs can be used to identify asymptomatic patients who are at high risk of developing t2d based on their non modifiable genetic risk . clinicians can then intervene with intensive lifestyle modification , medications ( eg , metformin ) , and/or counseling to prevent onset and progression of t2d . gprs-based risk stratification can also be implemented in conjunction with clinical covariates , as recently demonstrated by wagner et al. , as simple clinical covariates are excellent predictors of t2d-related complications . as we move toward more precise measurements and targeting of pathways , pprs for intermediate phenotypes has the potential to further renew our dignostics and therapeutics with regard to complex diseases like t2d . already , pprs methods have high-lighted unknown or unappreciated pathways ( such as nafld or lipodystrophy ) leading to t2d . although in the seminal work by udler et al . only 30 % of patients segregated to the highest decile of genetic risk for a given pprs , we suspect that this proportion will increase with larger/improved gwas particularly in non-european populations . more clinically relevant is the question of how pprs will change management of t2d : although we infer that t2d caused by lipodystrophy-like vs beta-cell failure processes can likely be optimally managed with different combinations of medications/lifestyle interventions , there is yet a paucity of evidence to support these hypotheses . hence , moving forward with gprs/ pprs in clinical settings , we strongly advocate for randomized studies to evaluate the effect of these genetic risk tools in clinical decision making and outcomes , simultaneous to its implementation . with such an evidence base available , we are hopeful that the treatment of t2d can mirror that of monogenic diabetes , whereby specific therapies are tailored to genotype . limited studies in non-european ancestry populations . perhaps the greatest limitation of research into the genomics of t2d and cvd is that the vast majority of studies have been performed in european-ancestry populations . recently , several high-profile gwas and other genetic studies for t2d have been performed for asian-ancestry and african-ancestry individuals . further gwas/genetic studies in non-european-ancestry populations are of crucial importance , as they serve as the input data for gprs/pprs , which in turn have the potential to identify patients at high risk for chronic diseases , thereby enabling clinicians to implement strategies for aggressive prevention/treatment . however , algorithms are strongly influenced by their input data and have already been shown to be less predictive in african-ancestry individuals . already , early application of rprs has found that efficacy is reduced when applied to african-ancestry subjects for t2d . similar application of rprs/gprs for cvd found attenuated effects in african-ancestry populations . factoring in multiethnic gwas data to create gprs/pprwhile accounting for complex population genetics will likely complicate matters further , as there is evidence of latent population structure even within the relatively racially homogenous uk bio bank . moreover , the largest stu dies currently are from european-ancestry populations , and g prs/p prsderived from these data perform poorly when extrapolated to other populations , hence exacerbating existing health disparities in non-white populations . in line with the recent international common disease alliance ( icda ) white paper , we believe that greater efforts must be made to ensure that all genetic ancestry groups are represented in biobanks linking genetic data and emrs and in the resulting discovery genetic work . metabolomics/proteomics and t2d . one growing area of research is the role of the metabolome/proteome in t2d pathogenesis . although the metabolome/proteome is vast , the majority of research has focused on the strong link between branched-chain amino acids ( bcaa ) and t2d risk . cross-sectional analyses rst found that bcaa levels were higher in t2d patients compared with healthy control subjects and positively correlated with insulin resistances . this finding was later confirmed in longitudinal data that showed a 2- 3.5/c2 increased risk of t2d with higher bcaa levels in 12 years of follow-up . the association between bcaa levels and t2d risk were later confirmed using mr , a likely causal relationship . given the predictive value of bcaa levels and the widespread use of metabolomic assays for newborn diagnoses ( eg , phenylketonuria ) , 1 promising avenue of investigation is the use of bcaa levels for precision medicine in identifying patients at high risk for t2d and implementing intensive preventative measures . conclusions and perspectives clustering methods allow for more precise sub-phenotyping of t2d and increased understanding of the pathophysiology leading to complex disease . in particular , genetic methodologies offer a wealth of information for a specific patient from a single peripheral blood draw . use of germline genetics for patients in combination with pprs has the potential to identify patients at high risk for specific intermediate phenotypes for t2d ( eg , nafld vs lipodystrophy ) , leading to earlier implementation of interventions tailored to the patient ’ s specific risk for various pathologic processes leading to t2d . in addition , development of novel methodologies has allowed for increased drug discovery and validation . further work will be required to elucidate and demonstrate the clinical utility of germline genotyping and pprs in t2d , particularly in non-european ancestry populations . obesity and type diabetes are diseases that can substantially decrease life expectancy , diminish quality of life and increase healthcare costs . the incidence of obesity and diabetes continues to rise by epidemic proportions . the term diabesity has been coin ed to describe obesity- dependent diabetes . according to the american diabetes association , in 2002 18.2 million people , or 6.3 percent of the population , had diabetes . diabetes was the sixth leading cause of death listed on u.s. death certificates in 2000. the direct and indirect cost of diabetes in the u.s. in 2002 was estimated at $ 132 billion . it has been estimated that the annual cost of overweight and obesity in the u.s. is $ 122.9 billion . this estimate accounts for $ 64.1 billion in direct costs and $ 58.8 billion in indirect costs . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a disease characterized by high levels of blood glucose resulting from defects in insulin production , insulin action or both . type 1 diabetes develops when the body 's immune system destroys pancreatic beta cells , the only cells in the body that make the hormone insulin that regulates blood glucose . this form of diabetes usually strikes children and young adults , although disease onset can occur at any age . type 1 diabetes accounts for only five to 10 percent of all diagnosed cases of diabetes . risk factors for type 1 diabetes include autoimmune , genetic and environmental factors . type 2 diabetes accounts for some 90 to 95 per-cent of all diagnosed cases of diabetes . it usually begins as insulin resistance , a disorder in which the cells do not use insulin properly . as the need for insulin rises , the pancreas gradually loses its by joanne z. rogers , msn , rn , cnsn , aprn , bc-ad , and christopher d. still , do , facn , facp obesity and type 2 diabetes ability to produce insulin . risk of type 2 diabetes the risk of developing type 2 diabetes is determined by some factors that can be modified and others that can not . some people are at higher risk for developing type 2 diabetes because of their genes . a first-degree relative of a person with types 2 diabetes has a risk five to 10 times higher than a person without a family history . another factor that may increase the risk of type 2 diabetes is low birth weight . intrauterine growth re striction leading to low birth weight seems to be associated with increased risk in adulthood of insulin resistance , glucose intolerance and type 2 diabetes . however , encouraging research studies in the u.s. and abroad have found that lifestyle changes , such as changes in diet and exercise , can prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes among high-risk adults . at all ages , the risk of type 2 diabetes rises with increasing body weight . the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is three to seven times higher in those who are obese than in normal weight adults , and is 20 times more likely in those with a body mass index ( bmi ) greater than 35 kg/m 2. obesity ’ s role in the development of type 2 diabetes it is not known for sure why some people develop insulin resistance , but it is known that obesity and lack of physical activity make it worse . the development of insulin resistance is an important component in the development of type diabetes . the connection is also seen in the f act that weight-loss can improve control or cure type 2 diabetes . in addition to the degree of obesity , where the excess body fat is deposited is important in determining the risk of type 2 diabetes . the degree of insulin resistance and the incidence of type 2 diabetes is highest in a person with an apple shape . these persons carry the majority of their excess body weight around their abdomen . in contrast , the pear shaped person carries most of their weight in the hips and thighs and this is not as likely to be associated with insulin resistance . treating obesity will treat type 2 diabetes weight-loss is an important goal for overweight or obese persons , particularly those with type 2 diabetes . moderate and sustained weight-loss ( five percent to 10 percent of body weight ) can improve insulin action , decrease fasting glucose concentrations and reduce the need for some diabetes medications . a program of diet , exercise and behavior modification can successfully treat obesity , but pharmacotherapy and/or surgery may be warranted . diet weight-loss occurs when energy expenditure exceeds energy intake . creating an energy deficit of 500-1,000 calories per day will result in a one to two pound weight-loss per week . writing down the food , portion size and calorie amount has been found to increase awareness and will provide objective evidence of calorie intake . for effective weight-loss , it is the calories that count , not the proportion of fat , carbohydrates or protein . however , when individuals are losing weight they should follow a diet similar to that recommended in the u.s. dietary guidelines for 2005 : fat 20-35 percent of calories ; carbo- hydrates 45-65 percent ; protein 10-35 percent . for the obese patient with diabetes or insulin resistance , limiting servings of complex carbohydrates may be beneficial . these foods include bread , rice , pasta , potatoes , cereal , peas and sweet potatoes . complex carbohydrates tend to raise blood sugar more than other foods and will cause the body to produce more insulin . with insulin resistance , these increased amounts of insulin can promote weight gain . increasing the amount of fiber in ones diet may be beneficial for both diabetes and obesity . a high intake of dietary fiber , particularly of the soluble type , may improve glycemic control , decreases hyperinsulinemia and lower plasma lipid concentrations in patient s with type 2 diabetes . additionally , high fiber foods assist in weight-loss and long- term weight maintenance by : requiring more chewing and taking longer to eat , providing fewer calories per serving , creating a sense of abdominal fullness and enhancing fullness between meals . physical activity regular physical activity helps maintain weight-loss and prevent regain . it also improves insulin sensitivity and glycemic control , may decrease the risk of developing diabetes and reduces mortality in patients with diabetes . a goal should be set for 30 to 45 minutes of moderate exercise five times per week . the exercise does not need to occur in a single session to be beneficial . dividing the activity into multiple and short episodes produces similar benefits and can enhance compliance . using a pedometer can help set objective exercise goals . gradually increasing the number of steps per day , with a goal of 8,000 steps , is ideal . any increase in activity over baseline will help in age sedentary moderate active male calorie requirements balancing the equation of less calories in and more calories out to promote weight-loss . medication there are several medications intended to treat diabetes , insulin resistance and obesity . a full review of these medications is beyond the scope of this article . however , metformin is one medication that has been found helpful in reducing the risk of type diabetes in patients with insulin resistance . metformin reduced the rate of progression to diabetes in obese persons with im-paired glucose tolerance . men treated with metformin who had central obesity and other features of metabolic syndrome ( insulin resistance , hypertension , hyperlipidemia ) had slightly more weight-loss and slightly lower fasting blood glucoses that those given a placebo . bariatric surgery according to the national institute of health ( nih ) , bariatric surgery should be considered by those who have a bmi greater than 40 , or have a bmi of 35-39.9 and medical problems such as diabetes , heart disease or sleep apnea . bariatric surgery changes the nor mal digestive process . there are three types of surgery : restrictive , malabsorptive and combined restrictive/mal absorptive . the nih web site provides an overview of the procedures and how they produce weight-loss . studies continue to show that diabetes can be cured in many patients using bariatric surgery . these clinical improvements occur not only because of the significant weight-loss , but be-cause of hormonal changes that occur when foods bypass the stomach . patients and their doctors need to consider the risk of bariatric surgery compared to the risk of obesity and the associated medical problems . when other methods of weight-loss have failed , bariatric surgery may be the best chance for significant and sustained weight-loss . prevention preventing and treating obesity will help in the prevention and treatment of diabetes . promoting a healthy lifestyle in children and adolescents will put them on a path that will decrease their risk of diabetes and its complications . helping adults at high risk for diabetes to change their diet and lifestyle may prevent them from developing diabetes and its consequences . diabetes is a term used to describe a cluster of conditions in which the body is unable to produce any or enough effective insulin . this is a hormone needed for glucose to enter the cells to be converted to energy . glucose is the fuel that your body needs . in your diet , this comes from foods such as fruit , milk , some vegetables , starchy foods and sugar . to help control your blood glucose you will need to eat healthy foods and be active . you may also need to take pills and /or insulin . there are two main types of diabetes type 1 : commonly diagnosed in children and adolescents , this occurs when the pancreas is unable to produce insulin . type 2 : usually developed in adulthood , this occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin and when the body does not effectively use the insulin that is produced . eating tips for diabetes 1. eat three meals each day , including breakfast . 2. try not to skip meals . 3. space meals 4 to 6 hours apart . 4. breakfast , lunch and supper should be about the same size . 5. avoid very large or very small meals . 6. have one piece of fresh fruit at each meal . 7. limit juice to 1/2 cup per day . 8. limit your intake to high fat foods , including deep fried or fried foods . 9. limit meat portions to the size of t he palm of your hand and choose fish or skinless poultry more often . 10. be careful of added fats . choose low fat or fat free dressings or spreads . eat right on the plate meal plan half of a standard dinner plate should contain at least two kinds of vegetables . of the remaining half , one quarter should contain starches such as potato , rice or pasta . the other quarter should contain protein , such as fish , lean meat , chicken , beans or lentils . also , be sure to have a beverage like milk and a piece of fresh fruit . handy portion guide your hands can be very useful in estimating appropriate portions . when planning a meal , use the following portion sizes as a guide : a serving size of peanut butter or cheese would be the size of two thumbs . a thumb-tip equals a teaspoon . three thumb-tips equal a tablespoon , about the amount of milk you would put in coffee . the palm of your hand equals a serving of meat , fish or poultry . this is about three ounces . a fist equals a cup . this would be the size of a serving of grains and starches . the fasting or before meal target should be 4.0 7.0 mmol/l , and that the 2 -hour post meal target should be 5.0 10.0 mmol/l . however , targets need to be individualized . ask your health care provider or diabetes education program what your blood glucose targets should be and your risk of hypoglycemia hypoglycemia this refers to a blood glucose level of less than 4 mmol/lor when symptoms are present at a level close to this . symptoms may include : trembling , shaky sweaty difficulty concentrating or thinking hungry be sure to inform any significant others of these potential symptoms for early hypoglycemia recognition . causes of hypoglycemia include : eating less than usual , or delayed meals or snacks undertaking more physical activity than usual recent weight loss drinking alcohol taking too much medication ( diabetes pill or insulin ) . what you need to do : 1. dont wait . act now ! chew 15 grams of glucose tablets or drink 3/4 cup ( 175 ml ) of juice or regular pop 2. follow- up check your blood sugar after 15 minutes . if less than 4 mmol/l , treat again if your usual meal is more than 1 hour away , you need a snack of slower -acting foods such as 6 crackers and cheese 3. check your blood sugar before and after treating a low blood sugar , if possible when to ask for assistance it is important to know the times when you need assistance . hypoglycemia ( low blood glucose ) and hyperglycemia ( high blood glucose ) can both become serious conditions if left untreated . when to call your health care provider , visit an emergency department or call for an ambulance ( 911 ) : hypoglycemia : more than 2 readings/day less than 4 mmol/lor3-4 readings less than 4 mmol/l in a week or any severe low blood glucose ( where you need help ) . hyperglycemia : for 2 consecutive days readings are higher than 14 mmol/l or you are experiencing symptoms such as ; nausea , vomiting , blurry vision , urinating more than usual , feeling weak or tired , or being unable to eat or drink . t2d is characterized by hyperglycemia from a combination of insulin resistance and relative deficiency of insulin secretion . the contribution of insulin resistance to diabetes pathogenesis explains the clinical association of diabetes with obesity and , subsequently , the coincidence of increasing t2d prevalence with increasing prevalence and severity of obesity in children . 4 differences have been described in the natural history of youth-onset t2d and adult-onset t2d . compared with adults , t2 din youth appears to progress more rapidly , with higher rates of metformin treatment failure and more rapid rates of beta cell decline . 5-7 the presence of diabetes encumbers those affected with a long-term burden of chronic disease and an increased risk of cardiovascular and microvascular complications . this risk in- creases with the duration of the disease , putting children with t2d at extremely high risk for complications . follow-up data from both the search for diabetes in youth study and the treatment options for diabetes in youth ( today ) trial have found a substantial presence of diabetes complications as early as adolescence and young adulthood . 8-11 moreover , the prevalence of complications and overall mortality are higher in youth with t2d compared with adults with t2d or even youth with type 1 diabetes . this burden of disease underscores the need to improve our understanding of diabetes risk , prevention , and optimal treatment in youth . t2 dis a complex , multifactorial disease influenced by both environmental factors and genetic variation as well as their interactions . the heritability of t2d is demonstrated by both the high concordance rates in identical twins and the typical presence of a family history of t2d in those with the disease . investigations of the genetics of diabetes risk have examined both overall t2d risk as well as individual glycemic traits that may predispose to diabetes , such as fasting glucose levels , insulin secretion , insulin resistance , and b-cell function . understanding the genetic underpinnings of diabetes risk offers an opportunity to improve both our knowledge of the mechanisms contributing to diabetes pathogenesis and our understanding of how best to individualize diabetes treatment and prevent complications . here we review the current state of t2d genetics , specifically as it pertains to children and adolescents . monogenic diabetes , diabetes as a result of a single gene abnormality , or mono-genic diabetes , shares clinical overlap with t2d , particularly t2d in youth . there are 3 major subgroups of monogenic diabetes : neonatal diabetes , syndromic diabetes , and maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) . Neonatal diabetes presents in infancy , although only a subset of infants develops diabetes in the neonatal period ( the first 30 days of life ) ; the majority of patients become symptomatic within the first 6 months of life . syndromic diabetes presents with additional extra pancreatic features , typically also in in-fancy . mody is characterized by noninsulin-dependent diabetes diagnosed at a young age ( < 25 years ) demonstrating an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern . subtypes of mody are based on specific genetic defects , with involvement of different genes associated with differences in clinical and physiologic phenotypes . monogenic diabetes can be caused by pathogenic muta- tions in genes that disrupt glucose sensing , insulin transcription , the potassium adenosine triphosphate channel that transduces the signal for insulin release , the insulin gene , or pancreatic development . understanding the genes associated with monogenic forms of diabetes has provided insight into the disease mechanisms of diabetes . eleven different genes have been identied as causal for mody in the online mendelian inheritance in man catalog : hnf4 a ( mody1 ) , gck ( mody2 ) , hnf1 a ( mody3 ) , pdx1 ( mody4 ) , hnf1 b ( mody5 ) , neurod1 ( mody6 ) , cel ( mody8 ) , ins ( mody10 ) , abcc8 ( mody12 ) , kcnj11 ( mody13 ) , and appl1 ( mody14 ) . note that the genes previously re- ported as causal for mody7 , mody9 , and mody11 are absent from this list , owing to the recent proposal to eliminate them from the list of causal mody genes based on up-dated genetic evidence . mutations in the hnf4 aand hnf1 a genes lead to abnormal insulin secretion , and mody caused by variants in these genes can be effectively managed with oral sulfonylurea therapy . the gene encoding glucokinase , which phosphorylates glucose to glucose -- phosphatein pancreatic cells and acts as a glucose sensor , is characterized by a mild , stable hyperglycemia with a low risk of com-plications that commonly does not require any treatment . given the clinical overlap between t2d and rarer forms of diabetes , a long-held hypothesis is that the genetic underpinnings of both common and rare forms of diabetes might not be entirely distinct . multiple studies have shown that mody affects a small but not insignicant subset of youth with diabetes , including those clinically diagnosed with t2 d. the search for diabetes in youth study published the first systematic study of mody prevalence in us youth , which re-ported a 1.2 % overall prevalence of mody . a genetic sequencing study of participants in the today study found that 4.5 % carried a pathogenic variant in a mody gene . a larger genetic study conducted by the progress in diabetes genetics in youth ( prodigy ) consortium that included the today cohort , a second cohort recruited by the today researchers for genetic studies , and a subset of the search for diabetes in youth study participants identified a 2.8 % incidence of mody . these studies focused on rare , highly penetrant variants in known mody genes . in adult studies of t2d genetics , there is increasing overlap of common variant associations and genes associated with monogenic diabetes . although such associations have not yet been shown in youth with t2d , it is possible that further examination of rarer variants will find associations along a spectrum of disease risk in genes or pathways relevant to diabetes . candidate gene studies many efforts to understand the genetic underpinnings of t2 din children have focused on genetic variants with known associations with glycemic traits or t2d risk in adults , examining whether similar associations exist in youth . individual variants have been shown to have similar associations in children for both fasting glucose and the homeostasis model assessment of b-cell function . several t2d risk genes have been associated with youth-onset t2 d , including tcf7 l2 , slc16 a11 , and abca1 . genetic risk scores ( grss ) , which allow for the assessment of the aggregate genetic risk of a given trait , have demonstrated association of grss constructed from variants associated in adults with glycemic traits and/or t2d risk with fasting glucose and measures of b-cell function , 35-37as well as measures of insulin resistance in youth . two studies have examined the ability of grss to identify children at risk of progressing to t2 d ; even though the scores were shown to be associated with t2d risk , 36,39in one of the studies clinical factors such as body mass index ( bmi ) and family history of t2d had higher predictive utility . genome-wide association studies since the first genome-wide association study ( gwas ) for t2 din adults was published in 2007 , there has been an explosion of genetic discoveries related to adult t2d with extremely well-powered studies and advanced analytic techniques . at the time of this publication , > 400 variants have been associated with t2 din adults . in comparison , large scale studies of pediatric t2d have not been conducted , largely due to limited sample sizes . the prodigy study is a collaborative effort to increase understanding of the genetics of t2d in youth by combining the sample sizes and rich phenotypic data of 2 pediatric t2d studies with the genetic prowess and resources of a large-scale adult diabetes genetics consortium . in prodigy , we conducted the first gwas for t2d in youth to identify genetic variants specifically predisposing to youth-onset t2d . we performed our genetic analysis in 3006 multiethnic youth with t2d who were autoantibody-negative for selected pancreatic autoantibodies and 6061 adult controls aged > 50 years and diabetes-free . functional studies of candidate genes are needed to understand how the identified genetic variants affect disease risk . studies evaluating the interplay between lifestyle and genetic factors are also needed to comprehensively evaluate t2d risk in youth . applications of genetics in youth-onset t2d there has been substantive growth in our understanding of the genetics of t2 din youth secondary to large-scale improvements in genotyping technology , next-generation sequencing techniques , and collaborative approaches such as prodigy to increase sample sizes . here we appraise the various applications of genetics as it pertains to pediatric t2d . todd characterizing disease subtypes pediatric t2d is a heterogenous disease likely because of differing contributions from both environmental and genetic factors , as well as varying degrees of insulin resistance and b- cell dysfunction among individuals . the benefit of sulfonyl-ureas in mody is a concrete example of how genetics can be used to characterize disease and dictate treatment . although not always as targeted , genetics also can be used to characterize subtypes for the more common form of t2d . a soft clustering approach has been used to deconstruct the heterogeneity of t2d with groups of loci representing various mechanisms of disease based on b-cell function , insulin resistance , and fat . these efforts to categorize subtypes help to better characterize pathophysiology , with the hope of informing clinical management and the risk of complications in the future . the benefit of using genetic data to characterize disease is that it remains unchanged over an individuals lifetime and can be measured even before symptoms develop , a particularly valuable characteristic for high-risk children who often have very short latent periods before full-blown t2d develops . risk prediction current guidelines from the american diabetes association recommend screening youth with obesity for t2d based on the presence of certain additional risk factors , including a family history of t2d , high-risk race/ethnicity , maternal his-tory of gestational diabetes , and physical features associated with insulin resistance , such as acanthosis nigricans . although these criteria allow clinicians to readily identify youth requiring diabetes screening , it is not clear which of these youth will go on to develop t2d . in addition , there is no simple or direct correlation between clinical features as body mass index , fasting insulin level , or c-peptide level and the progression to t2d . in the early days of t2d gwas efforts , studies showed that a polygenic risk score for t2d in adults does not outperform clinical models of prediction , but when added to routine clinical risk factors , genetic information may enhance predictive utility , particularly for populations of younger adults in whom risk factors , such as glucose intolerance , might not have fully manifested . recently , a trans-ancestry polygenic risk score ( prs ) of 1 259 754 hap map3 variants and weights showed that the top 2 % of the prs distribution can identify adults with a roughly 2.5- to 4.5-fold increase in t2d risk . using the top 2 % of the prs as the classier , the reported prevalence-adjusted positive predictive value was 0.26 and the negative predictive value was 0.90. although the current clinical utility of prss remains limited , in the future more sophisticated scores derived from diverse populations likely will continue to improve the predictive performance of these scores . insight into biologic mechanisms genetic discovery can help uncover underlying biology related to t2d with the interrogation of pathways related to the genetic loci . for example , the intronic snprs7903146 in tcf7 l2 , which has one of the strongest known effect sizes for common variants in both youth and adults with t2 d , 33,40,45has been localized to islet-selective open chromatin in b-cells using a method called formaldehyde assisted isolation of regulatory elements sequencing . the high-risk t allele has been associated with increased transcription in islets and increased expression on cellular luciferase as says compared with the c allele , highlighting a mechanism by which this polymorphism may contribute to t2d risk . complementary approaches of studying diabetes and glycemic traits as well as regulatory and functional data can help improve our understanding of the underlying mechanisms contributing to t2d risk and progression . this is particularly important in youth , who have slightly different underlying pathogenic mechanisms compared with adults with t2d , such as b-cell hyperresponsiveness in the early disease phase and a higher rate of b-cell decline . predicting response to interventions often in clinical medicine , patients do not respond or have adverse effects to medications that take time to uncover , leading to delays in optimal management , patient dissatisfaction , and wasted resources . genetics may help identify those patients who may benefit the most from a certain intervention , allowing us to stratify patients , which in turn could lead to better targeting of clinical or public health interventions . for example , the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention was effective even in the participants with the greatest genetic risk burden for figure . schematic depicting how various pathophysiologic mechanisms that contribute to diabetes risk have underlying genetic contributions that can be distinct or overlapping with other processes . in adults , there has been extensive work evaluating the genetic determinants of metformin response , given the significant interindividual variability in metformin response and evidence of significant heritability , with gwass so far identifying 5 variants associated with metformin response . similarly , sulfonyl-ureas are metabolized predominantly by cytochrome p450 2 c9 ( cyp2 c9 ) , and loss-of-function alleles in cyp2 cp have been associated with a greater response to sulfonyl-ureas . there have been no pharmacogenetic studies of t2d in youth reported to date , and this is an area where additional research is needed . for example , 50 % of youth on metformin therapy do not have sustained glycemic control , 5a greater proportion than seen in adults . the mechanisms behind this difference is unclear , and identifying genetic variants associated with metformin response in youth potentially could help elucidate the reasons for treatment failure . conclusions given the exponential rise in the incidence of t2 din youth , the aggressive nature of the disease compared with adults , and the significant heritability of the disease , it is critical that we strive to better understand the genetic basis of t2d in youth . although studies of pediatric t2d genetics have lagged behind adult studies largely because of the difficulty conducting studies with large sample sizes , technological advances and collaborative efforts have helped moved the eld forward . however , much remains to be discovered , and further large-scale efforts with computational and functional follow-up of findings are needed to continue to advance our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of t2d in youth . the knowledge of genetics can be used to better understand the pathophysiology of the disease in youth , characterize subtypes , assist with disease prediction , and aid the targeting of pharmacologic interventions with the ultimate goal of developing a personalized medicine approach to tackle youth-onset t2d . what leads to diabetes ? type and type 2 diabetes have different causes , but there are two factors that are important in both . you inherit a predisposition to the disease , then something in your environment triggers it . that ’ s right : genes alone are not enough . one proof of this is identical twins . identical twins have identical genes . yet when one twin has type 1 diabetes , the other gets the disease , at most , only half the time . when one twin has type 2 diabetes , the other 's risk is three in four at most . in most cases of type 1 diabetes , people need to inherit risk factors from both parents . we think these factors must be more common in white people because white people have the highest rate of type 1 diabetes . because most people who are at risk do not get diabetes , researchers want to find out what the environmental triggers are . one trigger might be related to cold weather . type 1 diabetes develops more often in winter than summer and is more common in places with cold climates . another trigger might be viruses . it 's possible that a virus that has only mild effects on most people triggers type 1 diabetes in others . early diet may also play a role . for example , type 1 diabetes is less common in people who were breastfed and in those who first ate solid foods at later ages . in many people , the development of type 1 diabetes seems to take many years . in experiments that follow relatives of people with type 1 diabetes , researchers have found that most of those who later got diabetes had certain autoantibodies , or proteins that destroy bacteria or viruses ( antibodies `` gone bad '' that attack the body 's own tissues ) , in their blood for years before they are diagnosed . if you are a man with type 1 diabetes , the odds of your child developing diabetes are 1 in 17. if you are a woman with type 1 diabetes and your child was born before you were 25 , your child 's risk is 1 in 25. if your child was born after you turned 25 , your child 's risk is 1 in 100. your child 's risk is doubled if you developed diabetes before age 11. if both you and your partner have type 1 diabetes , the risk is between 1 in 10 and 1 in 4. there is an exception to these numbers : about one in every seven people with type 1 diabetes has a condition called type 2 polyglandular autoimmune syndrome . in addition to having diabetes , these people also have thyroid disease and a poorly working adrenal gland some also have other immune system disorders . if you have this syndrome , your child 's risk of getting the syndrome and developing type 1 diabetes , is one in two . researchers are learning how to predict a person 's odds of getting diabetes . for example , most white people with type 1 diabetes have genes called hla-dr3 or hla-dr4 , which are linked to autoimmune disease . if you and your child are white and share these genes , your child 's risk is higher . suspect genes in other ethnic groups are less well-studied , however , scientists believe the hla-dr7 gene may put african american ’ s at risk , and the hla-dr9 gene may put japanese people at risk . an antibodies test can be done for children who have siblings with type 1 diabetes . this test measures antibodies to insulin , to is let cells in the pancreas or to an enzyme called glutamic acid decarboxylase ( gad ) . high levels can indicate that a child has a higher risk of developing type 1 diabetes . if you think your child might have type 1 diabetes , contact your doctor . if a member of your family has type 1 diabetes , you may be eligible for a risk screening offered through the trial net pathway to prevention study . trial net risk screening is free to relatives of people with type 1 and uses a simple blood test that can detect your risk of type 1 diabetes years before symptoms appear . if you are in the early stages of type 1 diabetes , you may also be eligible for a prevention study . type 2 diabetes has a stronger link to family history and lineage than type 1 , and studies of twins have shown that genetics play a very strong role in the development of type 2 diabetes . race can also play a role . yet it also depends on environmental factors . lifestyle also influences the development of type 2 diabetes . obesity tends to run in families , and families often have similar eating and exercise habits . if you have a family history of type 2 diabetes , it may be difficult to figure out whether your diabetes is due to lifestyle factors or genetics . most likely it is due to both . however , do n't lose heart . studies show that it is possible to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes by exercising and losing weight . learn how you can prevent or delay type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes runs in families . in part , this is due to children learning bad habits eating a poor diet , not exercising from their parents . but there is also a genetic basis . the good news is , like in adults , it is possible to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes in youth by encouraging healthy food choices , exercise and weight loss . type 2 diabetes is a chronic metabolic condition that affects the way your body metabolizes sugar ( glucose ) , an important source of fuel for the body . in type 2 diabetes , your body either resists the effects of insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into your cells or does n't produce enough insulin to maintain normal glucose levels . what causes type 2 diabetes ? the main cause of type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . insulin resistance happens when cells in your muscles , fat and liver don ’ t respond as they should to insulin . insulin is a hormone your pancreas makes that ’ s essential for life and regulating blood sugar levels . if your body is n't responding to insulin properly , your pancreas has to make more insulin to try to overcome your increasing blood glucose levels ( hyperinsulinemia ) . if your cells become too resistant to insulin and your pancreas can ’ t make enough insulin to overcome it , it leads to type 2 diabetes . several factors can contribute to insulin resistance , including : genetics , excess body fat , especially in your belly and around your organs ( visceral fat ) , physical inactivity , eating highly processed , high-carbohydrate foods and saturated fats frequently , certain medications , like long-term corticosteroid use , hormonal disorders , like hypothyroidism and cushing syndrome , chronic stress and a lack of quality sleep . what is insulin ? insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas , a gland located behind the stomach . it plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar ( glucose ) levels . when you eat , your digestive system breaks down carbohydrates into glucose , which enters the bloodstream . in response to rising blood sugar levels , the pancreas releases insulin . the main functions of insulin include : facilitating glucose uptake : insulin enables cells in the muscles , fat , and liver to absorb glucose from the bloodstream . this allows cells to use glucose for energy . inhibiting glucose production : insulin suppresses the liver 's production of glucose . between meals , when blood sugar levels drop , the pancreas reduces insulin secretion , and the liver releases stored glucose to maintain normal blood sugar levels . promoting glycogen synthesis : insulin helps convert excess glucose into glycogen , a form of stored glucose , in the liver and muscles . this stored glycogen can be released when energy is needed . inhibiting fat breakdown : insulin also plays a role in inhibiting the breakdown of fats in fat cells . when insulin levels are high , the body tends to store excess calories as fat . in type 2 diabetes , the body may not use insulin effectively , leading to insulin resistance . this can result in the pancreas producing more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not be enough to regulate blood sugar levels , leading to elevated glucose in the bloodstream . maintaining proper insulin function is essential for overall health , and disruptions in insulin production or utilization can lead to conditions like diabetes . management of diabetes often involves strategies to regulate insulin levels , either through lifestyle modifications , medications , or insulin therapy . insulin resistance : in type 2 diabetes , the body 's cells become resistant to the action of insulin . insulin is needed to allow sugar ( glucose ) to enter cells for energy . when cells resist insulin 's signal , glucose builds up in the bloodstream , leading to high blood sugar levels . causes and risk factors : genetics : family history of diabetes can increase the risk . certain ethnic groups ( e.g. , african american , hispanic , native american ) are more prone . weight : being overweight or obese is a significant risk factor . physical inactivity : lack of exercise can contribute to insulin resistance . unhealthy diet : high consumption of processed foods , sugary beverages , and a lack of fiber . medical conditions : metabolic syndrome : a cluster of conditions ( abdominal obesity , high blood pressure , high triglycerides , low hdl cholesterol ) increases diabetes risk . polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : common in women and associated with insulin resistance . age and gender : risk increases with age , especially after 45. women with a history of gestational diabetes are at higher risk . symptoms : early symptoms : increased thirst ( polydipsia ) and hunger : experiencing excessive thirst and hunger . frequent urination : needing to urinate often , especially at night . fatigue : feeling tired and lethargic . tingling or numbness in your hands or feet dry skin . unexplained weight loss . advanced symptoms : blurred vision . slow wound healing . recurrent infections . people assigned female at birth ( afab ) may experience frequent vaginal yeast infections and/or urinary tract infections ( utis ) . if you have these symptoms , it 's important to see your healthcare provider . simple blood tests can diagnose t2d . diagnosis : blood tests : fasting blood sugar , oral glucose tolerance test , and a1c test . symptoms and clinical signs : your doctor may consider your symptoms and overall health . management : lifestyle changes : healthy diet , regular exercise , weight management . medications : oral medications or insulin therapy may be prescribed . monitoring : regular blood sugar monitoring is important . complications : untreated or poorly managed type 2 diabetes can lead to serious complications such as heart disease , stroke , kidney damage , nerve damage , and vision problems . cardiovascular complications : increased risk of heart disease and stroke . hypertension often accompanies diabetes . microvascular complications : nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . retinopathy ( vision problems ) . foot complications : peripheral neuropathy increases the risk of foot ulcers and amputations . management : lifestyle modifications : healthy diet emphasizing whole foods , fruits , vegetables , and fiber . regular physical activity . weight management . medications : oral medications ( e.g. , metformin ) to improve insulin sensitivity . insulin therapy if oral medications are insufficient . blood sugar monitoring : regular monitoring to track blood glucose levels . education and support : diabetes education on self-care and management . emotional support for coping with the psychological aspects of diabetes . prevention : healthy lifestyle : adopting a healthy diet and regular exercise . maintaining a healthy weight . regular check-ups : regular health check-ups to monitor blood sugar levels , blood pressure , and cholesterol . public health implications : global impact : rising prevalence worldwide , associated with urbanization and lifestyle changes . healthcare costs : substantial economic burden due to healthcare costs and productivity loss . what is obesity ? obesity is a medical condition characterized by the accumulation of excessive body fat to the extent that it may have a negative impact on health . it is often defined by body mass index ( bmi ) , which is a person 's weight in kilograms divided by the square of their height in meters . a bmi of 30 or higher is generally considered indicative of obesity . 1. bmi categories : underweight : bmi less than 18.5 normal weight : bmi 18.5 to 24.9 overweight : bmi 25 to 29.9 obesity : bmi 30 or higher 2. causes : caloric imbalance : obesity typically results from consuming more calories than the body uses , leading to the storage of excess energy as fat . genetics : genetic factors can influence an individual 's predisposition to obesity . environmental factors : factors such as unhealthy diets , sedentary lifestyles , and lack of access to nutritious foods can contribute . 3. health risks : obesity is associated with an increased risk of various health conditions , including : type 2 diabetes cardiovascular diseases ( heart disease and stroke ) certain types of cancer sleep apnea osteoarthritis respiratory problems mental health issues 4. prevention and management : adopting a healthy , balanced diet with appropriate portion sizes . engaging in regular physical activity . behavioral interventions and counseling . medical treatments and , in some cases , bariatric surgery for severe obesity . 5. global prevalence : obesity has become a global health concern , affecting people of all ages and socioeconomic backgrounds . the prevalence of obesity has risen significantly in recent decades . 6. stigma and discrimination : individuals with obesity may face societal stigma and discrimination , affecting their mental and emotional well-being . 7. childhood obesity : childhood obesity is a particular concern , as it can lead to health issues later in life . addressing obesity often requires a multifaceted approach , involving changes in diet , increased physical activity , behavioral modifications , and sometimes medical interventions . it 's essential to recognize obesity as a complex health issue with various contributing factors and to approach its prevention and management with a comprehensive and individualized strategy . what is high triglycerides ? triglycerides are a type of fat ( lipid ) found in your blood . when you eat , your body converts any calories it does n't need to use right away into triglycerides . these triglycerides are stored in fat cells for later use . while your body needs triglycerides for energy , having too high a level of triglycerides in your blood can be a risk factor for various health issues . normal triglyceride levels : normal : less than 150 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) borderline high : 150 to 199 mg/dl high : 200 to 499 mg/dl very high : 500 mg/dl or higher causes of high triglycerides : 1. unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated fats , trans fats , and refined carbohydrates can contribute to elevated triglyceride levels . 2. lack of physical activity : sedentary lifestyles and lack of regular exercise can lead to higher triglyceride levels . 3. obesity : being overweight or obese is often associated with higher triglyceride levels . 4. insulin resistance and diabetes : insulin resistance and diabetes can lead to increased triglycerides . 5. genetics : some people may have a genetic predisposition to higher triglyceride levels . 6. certain medical conditions : hypothyroidism , kidney disease , and liver disease can contribute to elevated triglycerides . 7. alcohol consumption : excessive alcohol intake can raise triglyceride levels . health risks associated with high triglycerides : 1. cardiovascular disease : high triglycerides , especially when combined with low levels of hdl cholesterol , can contribute to atherosclerosis ( hardening and narrowing of the arteries ) and increase the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2. pancreatitis : extremely high levels of triglycerides can lead to inflammation of the pancreas ( pancreatitis ) , a serious and potentially life-threatening condition . management of high triglycerides : 1. lifestyle changes : adopting a heart-healthy diet low in saturated and trans fats , and high in omega-3 fatty acids . regular physical activity . limiting alcohol intake . 2. medications : statins and other medications may be prescribed to lower triglyceride levels . 3. treatment of underlying conditions : managing underlying conditions such as diabetes or hypothyroidism . 4. regular monitoring : regular blood tests to monitor triglyceride levels . it 's important to note that managing triglyceride levels is often part of an overall strategy to maintain heart health . lifestyle modifications , including a healthy diet and regular exercise , are key components of preventing and managing high triglycerides . individuals with concerns about their triglyceride levels should consult with a healthcare professional for personalized advice and appropriate interventions . what is low hdl cholesterol ? hdl cholesterol , or high-density lipoprotein cholesterol , is often referred to as `` good '' cholesterol . it plays a crucial role in the body by helping to remove other forms of cholesterol , specifically low-density lipoprotein ( ldl ) cholesterol ( often called `` bad '' cholesterol ) , from the bloodstream . hdl cholesterol carries cholesterol away from the arteries and back to the liver , where it can be processed and eliminated . this process helps prevent the buildup of plaque in the arteries . normal hdl cholesterol levels : desirable : 60 mg/dl and above borderline : 40 to 59 mg/dl poor : less than 40 mg/dl causes of low hdl cholesterol : 1. unhealthy lifestyle : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle can contribute to low hdl cholesterol levels . 2.unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated and trans fats can lower hdl cholesterol . 3. smoking : smoking is associated with lower hdl cholesterol levels . 4.genetics : genetic factors can influence cholesterol levels , including hdl cholesterol . 5. obesity : being overweight or obese can be associated with lower hdl cholesterol . 6.certain medical conditions : type 2 diabetes , metabolic syndrome , and some rare genetic disorders can affect hdl cholesterol levels . health implications of low hdl cholesterol : 1. increased cardiovascular risk : low hdl cholesterol is considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease . hdl cholesterol helps remove cholesterol from the arteries , and low levels may contribute to the buildup of plaque , increasing the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2. combination with high ldl cholesterol : having both low hdl cholesterol and high ldl cholesterol can significantly elevate cardiovascular risk . management of low hdl cholesterol : 1. lifestyle changes : regular physical activity , including aerobic exercise , can help raise hdl cholesterol . adopting a heart-healthy diet that includes sources of healthy fats , such as omega-3 fatty acids . 2. quit smoking : quitting smoking can have positive effects on hdl cholesterol levels . 3. weight management : losing weight , if necessary , can improve hdl cholesterol levels . 4. medications : in some cases , medications may be prescribed to raise hdl cholesterol , although lifestyle changes are usually the first approach . it 's important to note that cholesterol levels are just one aspect of cardiovascular health , and overall heart health involves a combination of factors , including blood pressure , blood sugar , and lifestyle habits . individuals concerned about their cholesterol levels should consult with a healthcare professional for a thorough evaluation and personalized advice on managing their cardiovascular risk . what is hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) ? hyperglycemia happens when there ’ s too much sugar ( glucose ) in your blood . it 's also called high blood sugar or high blood glucose . this happens when your body has too little insulin ( a hormone ) or if your body ca n't use insulin properly ( insulin resistance ) . hyperglycemia usually means you have diabetes , and people with diabetes can experience hyperglycemia episodes frequently . if you have hyperglycemia that 's untreated for long periods of time , it can damage your nerves , blood vessels , tissues and organs . severe hyperglycemia can also lead to an acute ( sudden and severe ) life-threatening complication called diabetes-related ketoacidosis ( dka ) , especially in people with diabetes who take insulin or people with undiagnosed type 1 diabetes . this requires immediate medical treatment . what is blood sugar ? glucose ( sugar ) mainly comes from carbohydrates in the food and drinks you consume . it 's your body 's main source of energy . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . if you do n't have diabetes , several bodily processes naturally help keep your blood glucose in a healthy range . insulin , a hormone your pancreas makes , is the most significant contributor to maintaining healthy blood sugar . high blood sugar most often happens due to a lack of insulin or insulin resistance . this leads to diabetes . people who have diabetes must use medication , like oral diabetes medications or synthetic insulin , and/or lifestyle changes to help keep their blood sugar levels in range . current diabetes statistics in the philippines according to the international diabetes federation or idf , the prevalence rate of diabetes in filipino adults is approximately 6.3 % . that means that out of 63 million adults in our country , almost 4 million have diabetes . but , even with these high figures , there could be more undocumented diabetes cases in the philippines . after all , the idf didn ’ t include younger people in their data , and they didn ’ t take pre-diabetes into consideration . what ’ s even more alarming is that in a 2016 report , the world health organization announced that 6 % of all deaths in the philippines occurred due to diabetes . is type 2 diabetes genetic ? the cause of t2d is complex , but researchers know that genetics play a strong role . your lifetime risk of developing t2d is 40 % if you have one biological parent with t2d and 70 % if both of your biological parents have it . researchers have identified at least 150 dna variations linked to the risk of developing t2d some increase your risk and others decrease it . some of these variations may directly play a role in insulin resistance and insulin production . others may increase your risk of t2d by increasing your tendency to have overweight or obesity . these genetic variations likely act together with health and lifestyle factors to influence your overall risk of t2d . what are the risk factors for type 2 diabetes ? you ’ re more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you : have a family history of type 2 diabetes ( biological parent or sibling ) . are older than 45. have overweight or obesity ( a bmi greater than 25 ) . are physically active less than three times a week . are black , hispanic , native american , asian american or pacific islander . had gestational diabetes while pregnant . have high blood pressure or high cholesterol . have prediabetes . have polycystic ovarian syndrome ( pcos ) . as t2d symptoms typically come on slowly , it ’ s important to see your primary care provider regularly if you 're at risk for the condition . this way , they can do screenings , like a basic metabolic panel ( bmp ) , to check on your blood sugar levels . it ’ s better to catch t2d earlier rather than later . diagnosis and tests how is type 2 diabetes diagnosed ? the following blood tests help your healthcare provider diagnose type 2 diabetes : fasting plasma glucose test : this lab test checks your blood sugar level . you typically need to get this test in the morning after an eight-hour fast ( nothing to eat or drink except water ) . a result of 126 mg/dl or higher means you have diabetes . random plasma glucose test : this lab test also checks your blood sugar , but you can get it at any time without fasting . a result of 200 mg/dl or higher means you have diabetes . a1c test : this lab test measures your average blood sugar levels over the past two to three months . a result of 6.5 % or higher means you have diabetes . in some cases , your provider may order an auto antibody blood test to see if you have type 1 diabetes instead of t2d . management and treatment what is the treatment for type 2 diabetes ? unlike many health conditions , you mainly manage t2d on your own with medical guidance and support from your healthcare team . this could include your : primary care physician ( pcp ) or endocrinologist . registered dietitian . certified diabetes care and education specialist ( cdces ) . ophthalmologist ( eye doctor ) . dentist . your team should also include family members and other important people in your life . managing t2d can be challenging you have to make several decisions every day for it . but everything you do to improve your health is worth it . the core features of type 2 diabetes management include : lifestyle changes , like more exercise and eating adjustments . blood sugar monitoring . medication . exercise for type 2 diabetes regular activity is important for everyone . it 's even more important if you have diabetes . exercise is good for your health because it : lowers your blood sugar level without medication in the short term and long term . burns calories and may help with weight loss . improves blood flow and blood pressure . increases your energy level and boosts your mood . helps with stress management . talk to your provider before starting any exercise program . you may need to take special steps before , during and after physical activity , especially if you take insulin . the general goal is to get at least 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity physical activity . type 2 diabetes diet ask your healthcare provider or registered dietitian to recommend a meal plan that ’ s right for you . what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat are all important in keeping your blood sugar levels in the range that your healthcare team recommends . the key to eating with type 2 diabetes is to eat a variety of nutritious foods from all food groups , in the amounts your meal plan outlines . in general , these types of foods can help support healthy blood sugar levels : lean proteins , like chicken , eggs , fish and turkey . non-starchy vegetables , like broccoli , green beans , salad greens and cucumbers . healthy fats , like avocados , nuts , natural peanut butter and olive oil . complex carbohydrates , like beans , berries , sweet potatoes and whole-wheat bread . blood sugar monitoring : monitoring your blood sugar is essential to finding out how well your current treatment plan is working . it gives you information on how to manage diabetes on a daily and sometimes even hourly basis . the results of blood sugar monitoring can help you make decisions about food , physical activity and dosing insulin . several things can affect your blood sugar . you can learn to predict some of these impacts with time and practice , while others are very difficult or impossible to predict . that ’ s why it ’ s important to check your blood sugar regularly if your healthcare provider recommends doing so . there are two main ways you can monitor your blood sugar at home if you have diabetes : with a glucose meter and finger stick . with a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) . you may choose either or both methods for a variety of reasons , such as : your access to the technology , which can vary due to cost and medical insurance coverage . how often your healthcare provider recommends checking your blood sugar . the medications you ’ re taking . your overall health . your healthcare provider may recommend taking medication , in addition to lifestyle changes , to manage type 2 diabetes . these include : oral diabetes medications : these are medications that you take by mouth to help manage blood sugar levels in people who have t2d but still produce some insulin . there are several types . the most commonly prescribed one is metformin . your provider may prescribe more than one oral diabetes medication at a time to achieve the best blood glucose management . glp-1 and dual glp-1/gipagonists : these are injectable medications that mainly help manage blood sugar levels in people with t2d . some glp-1 agonists can also help treat obesity . insulin : synthetic insulin directly lowers blood sugar levels . there are several types of insulin , like long-acting and short-acting types . you may inject it with syringes or pens , use inhaled insulin , or use an insulin pump . other medications : you may take other medications to manage coexisting conditions , like high blood pressure and high cholesterol . can type 2 diabetes be reversed ? type 2 diabetes is a chronic ( long-term ) disease , which means you must manage it for the rest of your life . there ’ s no cure for t2d . but you can manage it with lifestyle changes , medication and blood sugar monitoring in a way that keeps your blood sugar levels in a healthy range . if you stop managing it or undermanage it , your blood sugar levels will go back up . prevention can prevent type 2 diabetes ? certain strategies can help lower your risk of developing type 2 diabetes or delay its onset , including : exercising regularly ( at least 150 minutes a week ) . maintaining a weight that 's healthy for you . eating nutritious food . not smoking . unfortunately , some people have such strong genetic risk factors that even lifestyle changes are n't enough to prevent developing t2d . what is the outlook for type 2 diabetes ? if you have type 2 diabetes , your outlook depends on several factors , like : your age at diagnosis . how often and how well you ’ re able to keep your blood sugar levels in range . if you have other conditions , like high blood pressure or high cholesterol . your access to healthcare , diabetes management tools and medication , nutritious foods and support from loved ones . untreated or undermanaged t2d can lead to a range of health conditions . what are the complications of type 2 diabetes ? as your blood touches virtually every part of your body , having undermanaged type 2 diabetes that results in continuous high blood sugar over a long period of time can damage several areas of your body . potential complications of type 2 diabetes include : cardiovascular disease , including : coronary artery disease ( cad ) . peripheral artery disease ( pad ) . cerebrovascular disease . heart attack . stroke . eye conditions , including : diabetes-related retinopathy . diabetes-related macular edema . cataracts . glaucoma . blindness . additional complications include : diabetes-related nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . diabetes-related neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . skin conditions , like dry skin and bacterial and fungal infections . foot problems , including ulcers and infections that can lead to gangrene and possible amputation . gum disease and other oral health problems . hearing loss . digestive problems , including gastroparesis . sexual dysfunction . short-term complications of t2d hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state ( hhs ) is a life-threatening complication of type 2 diabetes . hhs happens when your blood sugar levels are too high for a long period , leading to severe dehydration and confusion . symptoms of hhs usually come on slowly and can take days or weeks to develop . symptoms include : very high blood sugar level ( over 600 mg/d l ) . mental changes , such as confusion , delirium or experiencing hallucinations . loss of consciousness . dry mouth and extreme thirst . frequent urination . blurred vision or loss of vision . weakness or paralysis that may be worse on one side of your body . hhs is life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment . if you experience these symptoms , call 911 or your local emergency services number . living with how do i take care of myself if i have type 2 diabetes ? type 2 diabetes is a complex condition that requires daily management , effort and planning . some tips that can help you manage t2d include : try to stick to healthy lifestyle changes : regular exercise and healthy eating plans are core parts of t2d management . set small goals and make one change at a time to prevent becoming overwhelmed . check your blood sugar regularly checking your blood sugar with a fingerstick and meter or using a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) is crucial to managing diabetes and preventing complications . follow your providers guidance for how often you should be checking it . take your medication regularly : follow your healthcare providers instructions for taking your medications ( if applicable ) . see your diabetes provider regularly : it 's important to see the provider who helps you manage t2d regularly to be sure that your management plan is working . don ’ t be afraid to ask them specific questions . see your other providers regularly , especially your eye doctor : type 2 diabetes can cause complications in various areas of your body , but especially your eyes . it ’ s important to see your eye doctor ( ophthalmologist ) at least yearly so that they can check the health of your eyes . have a sick day plan : talk with your diabetes provider about how to take care of yourself and manage t2d when you ’ re sick . illness can make it more difficult to manage blood sugar levels and can trigger hhs . stay educated : don ’ t be afraid to ask your provider questions about t2d . the more you know about t2d and your management , the more likely you 'll be able to live healthily and prevent complications . find community : connecting with other people who have t2d whether in-person or online can help you feel less alone . take care of your mental health : people with diabetes are two to three times more likely to have depression and are 20 % more likely to be diagnosed with anxiety than those without diabetes . living with a chronic condition that requires constant care can be overwhelming . it 's important to talk to a mental health professional if you 're experiencing signs of depression or anxiety . when should i see my healthcare provider if i have type 2 diabetes ? you ’ ll need to have regular appointments with your healthcare team to be sure you 're on track with your t2d management plan . as your body , life and routines change , your management will need to , as well . your healthcare team can provide new strategies that are unique to your needs . if you develop symptoms of any diabetes complications , be sure to see your provider as soon as possible . a note from cleveland clinic type 2 diabetes involves constant day-to-day care and management . while it 'll likely be very overwhelming at first , over time you 'll get a better grasp on how to manage the condition and how to be in tune with your body.be sure to see your healthcare team regularly . managing type 2 diabetes involves a team effort you ’ ll want both medical professionals and friends and family on your side . don ’ t hesitate to reach out to them if you need help . type 2 diabetes is a condition that happens because of a problem in the way the body regulates and uses sugar as a fuel . that sugar also is called glucose . this long-term condition results in too much sugar circulating in the blood . eventually , high blood sugar levels can lead to disorders of the circulatory , nervous and immune systems . in type 2 diabetes , there are primarily two problems . the pancreas does not produce enough insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into the cells . and cells respond poorly to insulin and take in less sugar . type 2 diabetes used to be known as adult-onset diabetes , but both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can begin during childhood and adulthood . type 2 is more common in older adults . but the increase in the number of children with obesity has led to more cases of type 2 diabetes in younger people . there 's no cure for type 2 diabetes . losing weight , eating well and exercising can help manage the disease . if diet and exercise are n't enough to control blood sugar , diabetes medications or insulin therapy may be recommended . symptoms symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly . in fact , you can be living with type 2 diabetes for years and not know it . when symptoms are present , they may include : increased thirst : experiencing a persistent feeling of thirst , often accompanied by a need to drink larger amounts of water than usual . frequent urination : having to urinate more often than usual , which may include waking up frequently during the night to urinate . increased hunger : feeling hungry more frequently or having an increased appetite , sometimes even after eating . unintended weight loss : losing weight without actively trying to do so , which may be a result of the body not properly utilizing glucose for energy . fatigue : persistent feelings of tiredness and lack of energy , even with adequate rest . - blurred vision : experiencing blurry or distorted vision , which can be a result of changes in the fluid levels within the eyes due to high blood sugar . slow-healing sores : wounds and sores taking longer to heal than usual , which is linked to reduced circulation and compromised immune function . slow healing of wounds : similar to slow-healing sores , individuals with diabetes may experience delays in the healing of cuts , bruises , or other injuries . frequent infections : increased susceptibility to infections , such as urinary tract infections , skin infections , and others , due to compromised immune function . numbness or tingling in the hands or feet : peripheral neuropathy , a condition where nerve damage can lead to sensations of numbness , tingling , or pain in the extremities . - areas of darkened skin , usually in the armpits and neck : acanthosis nigricans , a condition characterized by dark , thickened , and velvety skin in certain areas , often associated with insulin resistance . risk factors - insulin resistance : the primary factor in type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . the body 's cells become resistant to the effects of insulin , a hormone that helps regulate blood sugar . as a result , the pancreas produces more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not keep up with the increased demand . - genetics : there is a genetic predisposition to type 2 diabetes , and having a family history of the condition increases the risk . lifestyle factors : 1. obesity : excess body weight , especially around the abdomen , is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 2. physical inactivity : lack of regular physical activity is associated with an increased risk . 3. unhealthy diet : diets high in refined sugars , saturated fats , and processed foods can contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . age and ethnicity : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases with age , and certain ethnic groups , such as african americans , hispanics , native americans , and asian americans , are more prone to the condition . obesity : obesity is a medical condition characterized by an excessive accumulation of body fat . it is often measured using the body mass index ( bmi ) , with obesity defined as a bmi of 30 or higher . obesity is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes , as excess body fat can lead to insulin resistance . sedentary lifestyle : a sedentary lifestyle refers to a pattern of living that involves little or no physical activity or exercise . lack of regular physical activity is associated with various health risks , including an increased risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes . sedentary behavior may involve extended periods of sitting or low levels of physical movement . family history : family history refers to the presence of a particular health condition , such as diabetes , among close biological relatives ( parents , siblings ) . having a family history of diabetes can increase an individual 's risk of developing the condition , suggesting a genetic predisposition . age : age is a non-modifiable risk factor for type 2 diabetes . the risk of developing diabetes increases with age , particularly after the age of 45. this may be attributed to factors such as changes in metabolism , hormonal changes , and cumulative exposure to other risk factors over time . ethnicity : ethnicity refers to the cultural and ancestral background of an individual . certain ethnic groups have a higher predisposition to type 2 diabetes . for example , african americans , hispanics , native americans , asian americans , and pacific islanders are at an increased risk compared to the general population . genetic factors and lifestyle patterns within specific ethnic communities contribute to these disparities . causes - genes : scientists have found different bits of dna that affect how your body makes insulin . weight : having extra weight or obesity can cause insulin resistance . metabolic syndrome . people with insulin resistance often have a group of conditions including high blood sugar , high blood pressure , and high cholesterol and triglycerides . too much glucose from your liver : when your blood sugar is low , your liver makes and sends out glucose . after you eat , your blood sugar goes up , and your liver usually slows down and stores its glucose for later . but some people 's livers do n't . they keep making sugar . bad communication between cells : sometimes , cells send the wrong signals or do n't pick up messages correctly . when these problems affect how your cells make and use insulin or glucose , this can lead to diabetes . broken beta cells : if the cells that make insulin send it out at the wrong time , your blood sugar gets thrown off . high blood sugar can damage these cells , too . medical history and health : insulin resistance : insulin resistance is a condition where the body 's cells do not respond effectively to insulin , a hormone that regulates blood sugar . it can lead to elevated blood glucose levels and is a precursor to type 2 diabetes . prediabetes : prediabetes is a condition where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be classified as diabetes . individuals with prediabetes have an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes . heart and blood vessel disease : heart and blood vessel diseases encompass a range of conditions affecting the cardiovascular system , including coronary artery disease , heart failure , and stroke . diabetes is a significant risk factor for these diseases . high blood pressure : high blood pressure ( hypertension ) is a condition where the force of blood against the artery walls is consistently too high . it is a common risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , and individuals with diabetes are at an increased risk . low hdl ( `` good '' ) cholesterol : hdl cholesterol is often referred to as `` good '' cholesterol as it helps remove other forms of cholesterol from the bloodstream . low levels of hdl cholesterol are associated with an increased risk of heart disease . high triglycerides : triglycerides are a type of fat found in the blood . high levels of triglycerides are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease , and they often accompany conditions like obesity and insulin resistance . being overweight or having obesity : being overweight or having obesity is a condition where excess body fat accumulates , increasing the risk of developing type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and other health problems . - having a baby who weighed more than 9 pounds : giving birth to a baby weighing more than 9 pounds may be a risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes later in life . gestational diabetes : gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy . women who have had gestational diabetes are at an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life . polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : pcos is a hormonal disorder common among women of reproductive age . it is associated with insulin resistance and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . depression : depression is a mental health condition characterized by persistent feelings of sadness , loss of interest or pleasure , and other emotional and physical symptoms . it may be linked to an increased risk of developing diabetes . lifestyle factors : getting little or no exercise : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle are significant risk factors for type 2 diabetes . regular exercise helps improve insulin sensitivity and manage weight . smoking : smoking is a well-established risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , including heart disease . individuals who smoke and have diabetes face an increased risk of complications . stress : chronic stress can contribute to unhealthy lifestyle habits , such as overeating or not getting enough exercise , which may increase the risk of developing diabetes . sleeping too little or too much : disruptions in sleep patterns , whether due to insufficient sleep or excessive sleep , can affect metabolism and insulin sensitivity , potentially contributing to diabetes risk . type 2 diabetes diagnosis and tests diagnosing type 2 diabetes typically involves a combination of clinical evaluation and laboratory tests . here are the common methods and tests used for the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes : 1. symptoms and clinical evaluation : symptoms : the presence of classic symptoms such as increased thirst , frequent urination , unexplained weight loss , fatigue , and others may prompt further investigation . medical history : the healthcare provider will review the patient 's medical history , including family history of diabetes and other relevant factors . 2. fasting blood sugar test : this test measures the blood glucose level after an overnight fast ( usually at least 8 hours without eating or drinking anything except water ) . diagnostic criteria : a fasting blood sugar level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) or higher on two separate occasions generally indicates diabetes . 3. oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : the ogtt involves fasting overnight and then drinking a sugary solution . blood sugar levels are measured at intervals after consuming the solution . diagnostic criteria : a blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher two hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . 4. hemoglobin a1c test : this test measures the average blood glucose level over the past two to three months by assessing the percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) . diagnostic criteria : an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . 5. random blood sugar test : this test measures blood glucose levels at any time of the day , regardless of when the individual last ate . diagnostic criteria : a random blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher , along with diabetes symptoms , may indicate diabetes . 6. clinical guidelines and criteria : - world health organization ( who ) : the who also offers criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes , including fasting glucose levels and oral glucose tolerance tests . 7. blood tests : a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) test : purpose : measures the average percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) over the past 2 or 3 months . procedure : a blood sample is taken , and the result is expressed as a percentage . an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . fasting plasma glucose test : purpose : measures blood sugar levels after an overnight fast . procedure : the individual refrains from eating or drinking ( except water ) for at least 8 hours before the test . a blood sample is taken , and a fasting glucose level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) or higher on two separate occasions may indicate diabetes . oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : purpose : checks blood glucose levels before and 2 hours after consuming a sweetened beverage to evaluate how the body handles sugar . procedure : the individual drinks a sugary solution , and blood samples are taken before and after . a blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher 2 hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . it 's important to note that the diagnostic criteria and methods may vary slightly between different organizations and regions . additionally , the diagnosis is not solely based on a single test result ; healthcare providers consider multiple factors , including the patient 's overall health , risk factors , and symptoms . individuals at risk for type 2 diabetes , such as those with a family history or certain lifestyle factors , may undergo regular screenings to detect the condition early . early detection and management are crucial for preventing complications associated with diabetes . a healthcare professional will determine the most appropriate diagnostic approach based on the individual 's circumstances . stages of type 2 diabetes 1. insulin resistance : description : in this initial stage , the body usually produces enough insulin to regulate blood sugar levels within the normal range . however , cells resist the effects of insulin , meaning they do n't use it efficiently . as a result , the body compensates by producing more insulin to aid glucose entry into the cells . characteristics : insulin resistance may be temporary , but it can persist over time . there is n't a specific test to directly measure insulin resistance , making it challenging to diagnose this stage directly . 2. prediabetes : description : insulin resistance , if not addressed , leads to an accumulation of glucose in the blood . prediabetes is the stage where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not elevated enough to be classified as diabetes . during this stage , individuals may not experience noticeable symptoms . diagnostic criteria : an a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) level between 5.7 % and 6.4 % is indicative of prediabetes . this blood test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months . implications of prediabetes : individuals with prediabetes are at an increased risk for developing heart disease , stroke , and type 2 diabetes . early intervention through lifestyle modifications , such as a healthy diet and regular physical activity , can help prevent the progression to type 2 diabetes . it 's important to note that these stages represent a continuum , and the progression to type 2 diabetes is not inevitable . lifestyle changes , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , can play a crucial role in preventing or delaying the onset of type 2 diabetes in individuals with insulin resistance or prediabetes . regular health check-ups and screenings are important for early detection and intervention . type 2 diabetes treatment the treatment of type 2 diabetes involves a comprehensive approach that includes lifestyle changes and , in some cases , medication . here are the key components of type 2 diabetes treatment : 1. lifestyle changes : weight loss : objective : achieving and maintaining a healthy weight . benefits : weight loss can improve insulin sensitivity and help regulate blood sugar levels . recommendation : losing at least 7 % of body weight is considered beneficial . healthy eating : objective : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet . guidance : work with a registered dietitian to learn about carbohydrates , create a meal plan , and focus on : eating fewer calories . reducing consumption of refined carbs , especially sweets . incorporating more vegetables and fruits into the diet . increasing fiber intake . regular exercise : objective : engaging in regular physical activity . recommendation : aim for 30 to 60 minutes of exercise every day , which can include activities such as walking , biking , swimming , or other forms of aerobic exercise . strength training , like yoga or weightlifting , is also beneficial . note : check with your healthcare provider before starting a new exercise program , especially if you have other health concerns . monitoring blood sugar levels : objective : regularly checking blood sugar levels to track the effectiveness of treatment . guidance : depending on your treatment plan , especially if you are on insulin , your doctor will provide instructions on how often to monitor blood sugar levels . medication : purpose : medications may be prescribed to help manage blood sugar levels . types of medications : oral medications : these include various classes of drugs that help improve insulin sensitivity , reduce glucose production by the liver , and enhance glucose uptake by cells . injectable medications : some people may require insulin injections or other injectable medications to control blood sugar . regular medical check-ups : importance : regular visits to your healthcare provider are crucial to monitor overall health , adjust treatment plans as needed , and address any emerging issues . diabetes education : purpose : empower individuals with the knowledge and skills to manage their diabetes effectively . resources : diabetes education programs and support from healthcare professionals , including registered dietitians and diabetes educators . medication if lifestyle changes don ’ t get you to your target blood sugar levels , you may need medication . some of the most common for type 2 diabetes include : 1. metformin ( fortamet , glucophage , glumetza , riomet ) . this is usually the first medication used to treat type 2 diabetes . it lowers the amount of glucose your liver makes and helps your body respond better to the insulin it does make . 2. sulfonylureas . this group of drugs helps your body make more insulin . they include glimepiride ( amaryl ) , glipizide ( glucotrol ) , and glyburide ( dia beta , micronase ) . 3. meglitinides . they help your body make more insulin , and they work faster than sulfonylureas . you might take nateglinide ( starlix ) or repaglinide ( prandin ) . 4. thiazolidinediones . like metformin , they make you more sensitive to insulin . you could get pioglitazone ( actos ) or rosiglitazone ( avandia ) . but they also raise your risk of heart problems , so they are n't usually a first choice for treatment . 5. dpp-4 inhibitors . these medications -- linagliptin ( tradjenta ) , saxagliptin ( onglyza ) , and sitagliptin ( januvia ) help lower your blood sugar levels , but they can also cause joint pain and could inflame your pancreas . they work by blocking dpp-4 , which is an enzyme that affects the hormone incretin . 6. glp-1 receptor agonists . you take these medications with a needle to slow digestion and lower blood sugar levels . some of the most common ones are exenatide ( byetta , bydureon ) , liraglutide ( victoza ) , and semaglutide ( ozempic ) . 7. sglt2 inhibitors . these help your kidneys filter out more glucose . you might get bexagliflozin ( brenzavvy ) , canagliflozin ( invokana ) , dapagliflozin ( farxiga ) , or empagliflozin ( jardiance ) . empagliflozin has also proven effective in reducing the risk of hospitalization or death from heart failure . 8. gipand glp-1 receptor agonist . tirzepatide ( mounjaro ) is the first in its class and activates both the glp-1 and gipreceptors , which leads to improved blood sugar control . 9. insulin . you might take long-lasting shots at night , such as insulin detemir ( levemir ) or insulin glargine ( lantus ) . complications 1. cardiovascular diseases : description : high blood sugar levels over time can lead to damage in the heart and blood vessels , increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases . specific risks : increased likelihood of heart disease or stroke . higher risk of blocked blood vessels ( atherosclerosis ) . elevated risk of chest pain ( angina ) . 2. nerve damage ( neuropathy ) : description : prolonged exposure to high blood sugar can cause damage to the nerves throughout the body . specific risks : digestive issues . impaired feeling in the feet . sexual response problems . 3. kidney disease : description : diabetes is a leading cause of kidney disease and can lead to kidney failure . specific risks : kidney damage requiring dialysis or transplantation . 4. eye problems ( retinopathy ) : description : high blood sugar can damage the tiny blood vessels in the eyes , leading to vision problems . specific risks : retinopathy , which can cause blindness if untreated . 5. foot problems and amputation risk : description : poor circulation and nerve damage can contribute to foot problems , increasing the risk of infections and , in severe cases , amputation . specific risks : slower wound healing . increased risk of infections . 6. other complications : pregnancy : increased risk of miscarriage , stillbirth , or birth defects in infants born to parents with diabetes . sleep apnea : individuals with diabetes may be more prone to developing sleep apnea , a condition characterized by interrupted breathing during sleep . hearing problems : higher likelihood of hearing problems , though the exact relationship is not clear . brain health : high blood sugar levels may contribute to brain damage and an increased risk of conditions such as alzheimer 's disease . depression : people with diabetes are twice as likely to experience depression compared to those without the condition . type 2 diabetes diet guidelines : 1. work with a dietitian : collaborate with a registered dietitian to create a personalized meal plan based on your specific needs , preferences , and health goals . 2. focus on whole foods : limit highly processed foods : reduce the consumption of highly processed foods , which often contain added sugars , unhealthy fats , and high levels of sodium . choose whole , unprocessed foods whenever possible . control carbohydrates : 3. reduce added sugars : minimize the intake of foods and beverages with added sugars , such as sugary drinks , candies , and desserts . choose complex carbohydrates : opt for whole grains , legumes , and high-fiber foods to help regulate blood sugar levels . replace low-fiber refined grains ( e.g. , white bread ) with whole grains ( e.g. , whole wheat bread , brown rice ) . 4. prioritize non-starchy vegetables : include in every meal : boost your intake of non-starchy vegetables like broccoli , leafy greens , peppers , and green beans . these vegetables are rich in fiber , vitamins , and minerals . 5. moderate portion sizes : portion control : be mindful of portion sizes to manage calorie intake and prevent overeating . use smaller plates to help control portions . 6. lean protein sources : choose lean proteins : include lean protein sources such as poultry , fish , tofu , legumes , and low-fat dairy in your diet . limit red and processed meats . 7. healthy fats : opt for healthy fats : choose sources of healthy fats , such as avocados , nuts , seeds , and olive oil . limit saturated and trans fats found in fried foods and processed snacks . 8. regular meal timing : establish consistent meal times : aim for regular meal timings to help regulate blood sugar levels . include snacks if needed , especially if taking medications that may cause low blood sugar . 9. stay hydrated : drink water : stay hydrated by drinking water throughout the day . limit sugary beverages and alcohol . 10. monitor blood sugar responses : test and analyze : regularly monitor blood sugar levels to understand how different foods impact your readings . adjust your diet based on your blood sugar responses . 11. individualized approach : personalize your plan : recognize that individual responses to foods can vary . tailor your diet to your specific needs and preferences . 12. regular review and adjustments : stay in touch with healthcare providers : regularly review your diet plan with healthcare providers and make adjustments as needed . managing type 2 diabetes managing your type 2 diabetes well helps you avoid complications and feel your best . along with a healthy diet , regular exercise , and medication as prescribed : 1. keep your blood pressure and cholesterol levels in the healthy range . high levels of either could raise your risk of diabetes complications . 2. get regular eye exams , dentist visits , and physicals . 3. check your feet daily for sores , redness , or swelling and let your doctor know if you notice any issues . 4. get at least 7 hours of good-quality sleep each night , as sleep loss interferes with blood sugar control . ask your doctor for help if you have a hard time sleeping . 5. be careful with alcohol . limit alcoholic drinks to 1-2 drinks a day , depending on your size and gender . if you do drink alcohol , check your blood sugar afterward . 6. work with your doctor to come up with a sick day plan . even a minor illness can interfere with your blood sugar and insulin levels . you may need to adjust your medications or check your blood sugar more often . type 2 diabetes prevention strategies : 1. weight management : - aim to lose 7 % to 10 % of your body weight if overweight . - weight loss in this range can significantly reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes . 2. regular physical activity : engage in at least 30 minutes of brisk walking or moderate-intensity exercise most days of the week . physical activity helps improve insulin sensitivity and overall metabolic health . 3. healthy eating habits : avoid highly processed carbohydrates . limit the consumption of sugary drinks . reduce intake of trans and saturated fats . limit red and processed meat consumption . emphasize a balanced diet rich in fruits , vegetables , whole grains , lean proteins , and healthy fats . 4. smoking cessation : quit smoking to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes . work with your doctor to manage weight gain that may occur after quitting . 5. regular monitoring of health : keep track of key health indicators , including blood pressure , cholesterol levels , and body weight . regular health check-ups and screenings can help detect and address risk factors early . 6. healthy diet : adopt a well-balanced and nutritious diet that supports overall health . work with a dietitian if needed to create a personalized meal plan . 7. regular exercise routine : establish and maintain a regular exercise routine that includes both aerobic and strength-training exercises . exercise is a powerful tool in preventing and managing diabetes . 8. weight management : strive to maintain a healthy weight through a combination of a balanced diet and regular physical activity . weight management is crucial for overall health and diabetes prevention . 9. monitoring blood sugar levels : regularly monitor blood sugar levels , especially if you have risk factors for diabetes . early detection and intervention are key in preventing the progression to type 2 diabetes . 10. medications ( if prescribed ) : - if prescribed by a healthcare provider , take medications as directed . medications may be recommended for individuals at high risk of developing diabetes . preventing type 2 diabetes involves making consistent and sustainable lifestyle changes . these measures not only reduce the risk of diabetes but also contribute to overall well-being and long-term health . individuals with specific risk factors or a family history of diabetes should work closely with healthcare providers to develop a personalized prevention plan . monitoring : blood glucose levels : regular monitoring of blood glucose levels is essential to track how different factors , such as diet and exercise , affect blood sugar . a1c levels : the a1c test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months , offering insight into long-term glucose control . blood pressure : monitoring blood pressure is crucial , as individuals with diabetes have an increased risk of cardiovascular complications . cholesterol levels : keeping cholesterol levels in check is important for cardiovascular health , especially given the higher risk in diabetes . treatment options : oral medications : various classes of oral medications help manage blood sugar levels by improving insulin sensitivity , reducing glucose production , or aiding glucose uptake . insulin therapy : some individuals may require insulin injections to regulate blood sugar effectively . lifestyle modifications : healthy habits , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , are foundational to diabetes management . bariatric surgery : in specific cases , bariatric surgery may be considered as a treatment option . nutrition : carbohydrate counting : monitoring and managing carbohydrate intake is crucial for blood sugar control . glycemic index : understanding the glycemic index of foods helps individuals make informed choices to prevent rapid spikes in blood sugar . balanced meals : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet supports overall health and diabetes management . portion control : managing portion sizes helps regulate calorie intake and maintain stable blood sugar levels . education and support : diabetes education programs : these programs provide information and skills to individuals with diabetes for effective self-management . support groups : connecting with others facing similar challenges can provide emotional support and practical insights . lifestyle counseling : professional counseling helps individuals address behavioral aspects , set goals , and make sustainable lifestyle changes . medical professionals : 1. endocrinologist : specialization : endocrinologists are medical doctors who specialize in endocrinology , a field that focuses on the endocrine system and hormone-related disorders . diabetes falls under their expertise , as it involves the regulation of insulin , a key hormone . role in diabetes management : diagnosis : endocrinologists often play a crucial role in diagnosing diabetes , especially when the condition is complex or difficult to manage . treatment planning : they create comprehensive treatment plans tailored to the individual , considering factors like medication , insulin therapy , and lifestyle modifications . management of complications : endocrinologists are equipped to address and manage complications associated with diabetes , such as cardiovascular issues , kidney problems , and nerve damage . 2. diabetes educator : specialization : diabetes educators are healthcare professionals with specialized training in diabetes care and education . they may include nurses , dietitians , pharmacists , or other healthcare providers . role in diabetes management : education : diabetes educators empower individuals with diabetes through education , covering topics such as blood sugar monitoring , medication management , and lifestyle modifications . support : they provide ongoing support , helping individuals navigate the challenges of daily diabetes management and offering practical solutions . behavioral counseling : diabetes educators often engage in behavioral counseling to assist individuals in adopting and sustaining healthy habits . 3. dietitian/nutritionist : specialization : dietitians or nutritionists are experts in food and nutrition , with specialized training in providing dietary guidance for various health conditions , including diabetes . role in diabetes management : meal planning : dietitians help create personalized meal plans that align with diabetes management goals , considering factors like carbohydrate counting , glycemic index , and portion control . nutritional counseling : they offer nutritional counseling to address individual dietary preferences , cultural considerations , and lifestyle factors . weight management : dietitians play a crucial role in weight management , a key component of diabetes care . 4. primary care physician : specialization : primary care physicians ( pcps ) are general practitioners who provide comprehensive healthcare and serve as the first point of contact for individuals seeking medical care . role in diabetes management : initial diagnosis : pcps often diagnose type 2 diabetes during routine check-ups or in response to specific symptoms . - ongoing monitoring : they play a central role in the ongoing monitoring of diabetes and related health issues through regular check-ups . coordination of care : pcps coordinate with specialists , such as endocrinologists and diabetes educators , to ensure a comprehensive and integrated approach to diabetes management . - medication management : pcps may prescribe and manage medications for diabetes , adjusting treatment plans as needed . blood glucose monitoring devices : 1. glucometer : description : a glucometer , also known as a blood glucose meter or blood sugar meter , is a portable , handheld device designed for self-monitoring of blood glucose levels . how it works : - individuals with diabetes use a lancet to prick their fingertip and obtain a small drop of blood . this blood sample is then applied to a test strip inserted into the glucometer . the glucometer analyzes the blood sample and provides a digital readout of the current blood glucose level . key features : portability : glucometers are compact and easy to carry , allowing individuals to monitor their blood glucose levels conveniently at home or on the go . rapid results : the results are typically available within seconds , enabling quick and timely adjustments to medication , diet , or activity . usage : individuals often use glucometers multiple times a day to track variations in blood glucose levels . regular monitoring helps in understanding how food , physical activity , and medications impact blood sugar . advantages : cost-effective and widely accessible . easy to use for routine monitoring . limitations : provides a snapshot of blood glucose at a specific moment . does not capture trends or variations between measurements . 2. continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) : description : continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) systems are advanced devices that offer real-time monitoring of glucose levels throughout the day and night . how it works : a small sensor is inserted under the skin , usually on the abdomen . the sensor continuously measures glucose levels in the interstitial fluid ( fluid between cells ) and transmits this data to a monitor or a smartphone . the monitor displays real-time glucose levels and trends . key features : continuous monitoring : cgm systems provide a continuous stream of data , offering a more comprehensive view of glucose fluctuations . alerts and alarms : users can set customizable alerts for high and low glucose levels , enhancing proactive management . trend analysis : cgm devices provide graphs and trend lines , helping individuals understand how their glucose levels change over time . usage : cgm systems are typically worn for several days , up to two weeks , before requiring sensor replacement . data can be downloaded and shared with healthcare providers for comprehensive analysis . advantages : offers a more detailed and continuous picture of glucose dynamics . provides insights into how lifestyle factors impact glucose trends . limitations : - higher cost compared to traditional glucometers . requires sensor insertion beneath the skin , which may be uncomfortable for some individuals . genetic factors type 2 diabetes has a complex etiology , and both genetic and environmental factors contribute to its development . genetic factors play a significant role in determining an individual 's susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . here are some key aspects related to the genetic factors of type 2 diabetes : 1. family history : inheritance : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases if there is a family history of the condition . individuals with a first-degree relative ( parent or sibling ) with type 2 diabetes are at a higher risk . polygenic inheritance : multiple genes contribute to diabetes risk , and it often involves polygenic inheritance , meaning that several genes collectively influence susceptibility . 2. genetic variants and mutations : common variants : there are common genetic variants associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . these variants are often identified through genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) . rare mutations : in some cases , rare mutations in specific genes can significantly increase the risk of diabetes . examples include mutations in the hnf1 a and hnf4 a genes . 3. insulin resistance and beta cell function : genes influencing insulin sensitivity : genetic factors can impact insulin sensitivity , affecting how effectively cells respond to insulin . variations in genes like tcf7l2 are associated with insulin resistance . beta cell function genes : genes involved in the function of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas , such as those encoding for proinsulin processing , can influence diabetes risk . 4. epigenetic modifications : environmental influence on gene expression : epigenetic modifications , such as dna methylation and histone modification , can influence how genes related to glucose metabolism are expressed . lifestyle and environmental factors : environmental factors , including diet and lifestyle , can interact with genetic factors and contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . 5. interaction with lifestyle factors : gene-environment interaction : genetic factors interact with lifestyle and environmental factors , such as diet , physical activity , and obesity , influencing the overall risk of type 2 diabetes . obesity-related genes : some genes are associated with an increased risk of obesity , which is a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 6. mitochondrial dna : mitochondrial involvement : mitochondria , the energy-producing structures in cells , have their own dna . variations in mitochondrial dna have been studied in relation to type 2 diabetes . 7. ethnic and racial differences : population-specific variations : there are ethnic and racial differences in the prevalence of certain genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes . different populations may have unique genetic risk profiles . 8. genetic testing : risk prediction : genetic testing can provide information about an individual 's genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . however , it 's important to note that genetic testing is only one aspect of overall risk assessment , and lifestyle factors also play a significant role . since the discoveries of gregor mendel , modern biology has used genetics to study dna and rna and how the generation , expression and transmission of genetic information from generation to generation occur . genetics can be defined as the study of genes , the fundamental purpose of which is to investigate heritable traits . it is a branch of biology and is constantly evolving . it is considered that the first geneticist in history was gregor johann mendel , who developed the well-known mendelian laws that explain genetic inheritance . his experiments were with different varieties of peas . these findings were key for biology to find another way to study living organisms . genetics is very relevant , especially in determining the transmission of diseases from parents to children . we all have chromosomes , 23 inherited from the mother and 23 inherited from the father . the chromosomes contain the genes and are composed of dna , which is the code that provides the instructions . in fact , genes tell each cell how to behave . a genetic abnormality or mutation , in other words , a change in the instructions , can cause diseases or syndromes . sometimes they are mild , sometimes moderate and sometimes severe , depending on the case . genetics has several branches , such as classical genetics , developmental genetics and molecular genetics , among others . the cases of diabetes in the philippines is on the rise while it ’ s difficult to establish precisely how the prevalence rate of dm has been increasing through the years , some diabetes statistics in the philippines can still give us a clear picture . for instance , a year cohort study from 1998 to 2009 showed an alarming growth of diabetes in our country . additionally , in the 7th national nutrition and health survey ( nnhs ) of 2008 , the researchers found out that the prevalence rate of diabetes in our country was 4.8 % . five years later , in the 8th nnhs , the prevalence rate increased by 0.6 % . suffice to say , filipino doctors agree that the cases of diabetes in our country are steadily on the rise and that we need more aggressive measures for management and prevention . the risk factors of diabetes in the philippines based on a 2016 data , the world health organization reported that the related risk factors for diabetes in the philippines are being overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity . the same who report shows that : 3 % of filipinos are overweight , while 4.7 % are obese . 7 % of filipinos are physically inactive additionally , the food and nutrition research institute ( fnri ) , in their 2018 expanded national nutrition survey ( enns ) , also said the prevalence rates of adult overweight and obesity are 28.8 % and 9.8 % , respectively . although the researchers only surveyed 8 metro manila cities , they indicated that these figures are already at a national level . interestingly , they also noted an increasing prevalence of physical inactivity among filipino adults . whats causing these concerning facts and figures about being overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity among filipinos ? the top contributing factors for increased diabetes risk reports show that the reasons why filipinos have an increased risk for diabetes are : 1. dependence on electronic gadgets in a review entitled , diabetes care in the philippines , the author mentioned that the rapid urbanization significantly contributes to the rise in the diabetes statistics in the philippines . this is because with urbanization or modernization comes our increasing dependence on electronic gadgets . and although electronic devices bring a lot of information , convenience , and entertainment , they also pose some health risks . for instance , various studies have already noted that excessive use of gadgets like smartphones and laptops can lead to a sedentary lifestyle a significant risk factor for diabetes mellitus . 2. traditional diet of white rice another contributing factor for the filipinos increased risk for diabetes is the traditional diet of white rice . as in most asian countries , rice is one of our food staples . traditionally , filipinos will have at least a cup of rice per meal . our love for rice has even given birth to the famous extra rice and unli rice cultures . the problem is , some studies have already identified that eating white rice regularly can increase our diabetes risk by up to 1.5 % . 3. challenged medical care another contributing factor to the increased risk of diabetes in the philippines is the healthcare system . in the review , diabetes care in the philippines , the author mentioned that our national insurance system does not offer comprehensive diabetes care in a preventive model . moreover , private insurance companies often only have limited diabetes care packages . this challenge in our medical care only means that filipinos often have to rely on out-of-pocket expenses for their diabetes medical needs , like diagnostic tests and daily medications . current diabetes management in the philippines as of now , the doh has been taking measures to curb the rising diabetes statistics in the philippines . the doh ’ s nationwide efforts in preventing and controlling diabetes and its complications include : free diabetes risk screening at barangay health stations , health centers , and local and provincial hospitals . free medications like oral anti-diabetes drugs and insulin to filipinos diagnosed with diabetes empowering the primary healthcare workers on how to manage diabetes properly . but , despite these efforts , researchers understand that the best investment is still prevention . this is because once diagnosed with diabetes , a person already runs the risk of suffering its complications . these diabetes complications can worsen the patients overall health and financial status . key takeaways various reports indicate that the prevalence rate of diabetes in the philippines is steadily rising . according to the who , the related risk factors for diabetes in our country are being overweight , obesity , and physical inactivity . filipinos have increased risk for diabetes mainly due to our increasing dependence on electronic gadgets that lead to a sedentary lifestyle , our attachment to the traditional diet that includes white rice as a food staple , and the challenges that our healthcare system faces when it comes to diabetes care . management tips diabetes management basics if you have been diagnosed with diabetes , there is no need to worry . diabetes can be managed , and people who have either type 1 or type 2 diabetes can live long and healthy lives . tips for diabetes management : 1. make sure to eat healthy . there are no recommended diets for people with diabetes , but its important to eat foods that are low in fat and calories , but high in vitamins and nutrients . a diet high in fruits , vegetables , nuts , whole grains , and olive oil is associated with reduced risk of diabetes . consulting a nutritionist may also help . 2. avoiding eating too many sweets . since you want to keep your blood sugar in check , being careful about your sugar intake is very important . eating sweets would be fine , so long as it is done in moderation , and only in small portions . 3. engage in daily exercise . exercise helps keep your body strong and healthy , and also lowers your blood sugar . this is because when you exercise , your body uses the sugar in your blood and converts it to energy . 4. monitor your blood sugar levels . this is especially important for those diagnosed with type 1 diabetes since it helps you know if your blood sugar is within the ideal range . for type 2 sufferers , it lets you know how well you 're managing your blood sugar . 5. don ’ t forget to take insulin . insulin therapy is necessary for type 1 sufferers , since they will die if they don ’ t take insulin regularly . for type 2 sufferers , it would depend on the doctors recommendation . 6. don ’ t forget your other medication . there are some cases where your doctor will ask you to take other types of medication to help manage your condition . taking these medicines on schedule helps you manage your condition better . diabetes mellitus diabetes mellitus is a chronic and possibly incapacitating condition that is prevalent in the philippines . there are two types of diabetes : type and type 2. type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune , childhood-onset disease wherein an individual does not produce insulin . it affects about 500,000 children 14 years and below and this number is said to be rising by 3 % annually . type 2 diabetes , on the other hand , is a metabolic disorder due to insulin resistance . this type of diabetes is said to affect 20.6 % or one out of every five filipinos who are 30 years old and above . because of the continuous increase of the number of people afflicted with this condition , a lot of attention has been given to its prevention and cure . gene variations that signal disease sequences in diabetes are of special interest to the diabetes study group . specialists are working together to discover the link between genes and the environment that lead to diabetes and its complications . the group has looked at associations between genetic problems ( mutations and polymorphisms ) and diabetes among filipinos . type 2 diabetes mellitus what is it ? type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) is a chronic , metabolic disorder that presents with hyperglycemia , which refers to a condition of elevated sugar levels in the blood . this disease is brought about by abnormalities in the secretion of insulin , which is a vital hormone responsible for the regulation of blood sugar levels . in patients with t2dm , there is also an increase in the production of glucose , or sugar , from the liver . a key phenomenon in t2dm is the presence of insulin resistance , which refers to an impairment in the uptake of glucose in skeletal muscles and peripheral tissues , resulting to hyperglycemia . who are at risk to have it ? some individuals may have an increased risk for developing t2dm . these people are those who are overweight or obese , those with impaired fasting glucose level , those with high levels of triglycerides and those with conditions such as hypertension or a high blood pressure , schizophrenia , acanthosis nigricans and polycystic ovary syndrome . having a sedentary lifestyle is also a risk factor for developing t2dm . women who had a history of diabetes during pregnancy , or gestational diabetes mellitus , have as much as a 60 % lifetime risk of developing type 2 diabetes . a family history of diabetes mellitus is also a risk factor for acquiring t2dm . individuals who are afflicted with these risk factors must be screened for the presence of t2dm in a timely manner . if you do n't have any of the above risk factors , it is recommended for filipinos to be screened starting at the age of 40 years old . what are its symptoms ? commonly , patients with t2dm may not experience any bothersome symptoms and the disease would simply be detected on a routine laboratory examination . individuals with high blood sugar levels may experience increased thirst ( polydipsia ) , more frequent urination ( polyuria ) , and excessive urination at night ( polydipsia ) . weight loss is a sign of uncontrolled diabetes , which reflects the deficiency of insulin . people living with diabetes must be on the look-out for more serious symptoms such as blurring of vision , frothy urine ( bubbly urine ) , tingling sensation of the feeling of having pins and needles on the hands and feet , leg pain and abdominal discomfort and pain because these may be indicative of the presence of the multi-systemic complications of diabetes . wounds that take a long time to heal , especially on the feet , may be found in people with diabetes . how is it diagnosed ? t2dm is diagnosed by requesting laboratory examinations . recommended screening test is fasting blood sugar . if the level is 126 mg/dl ( 7 mmol/l ) or higher on 2 separate occasions is already considered to have t2 dm . other tests that your doctor might request are 75 grams oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) and hb a1c , which is your average blood sugar levels for the past 3 months . how is it treated ? proper nutrition and a healthy lifestyle are crucial pillars in the management of t2 dm . a well-balanced diet consisting mostly of vegetables , legumes , lentils , noodles , rice , bread , grains , and non-sweet fresh fruits , with moderate amounts of protein-rich food such as fish , seafoods , eggs , lean meat , skin-less chicken , low-fat cheese , low-fat yogurt , and nuts . sugar-sweetened beverages and foods that have a high salt , sugar , and fat content should be avoided . a person living with diabetes should not skip meals . exercise is a vital aspect in maintaining a healthy lifestyle for persons with diabetes . moderate intensity exercise , as tolerated by the individual , for about 150 minutes per week , at least thirty minutes per day on most days of the week , is highly recommended . 4 health protocols must be observed when performing such aerobic activity during this time of the covid-19 pandemic . outdoor exercises , such as running , walking , jogging , and biking , are preferred . gardening , which is also a gratifying activity that has become popular during the quarantine period , also helps burn calories . t2dm may be treated by medications in the form of oral anti-hyperglycemic agents , such as metformin , which belongs to the class of drugs called biguanides , sulfonylureas , dipeptidyl-peptidase inhibitors , and other medications such as pioglitazone and acarbose . some patients need to be treated with insulin injections . it is crucial to regularly consult with the doctor so you can be advised on the most appropriate treatment for you . what are its complications ? various organs of the body may be affected by t2dm . in long-standing t2dm , the blood vessels of the eyes may be involved , in a condition called diabetic retinopathy . persons living with t2dm must undergo an eye exam upon diagnosis of their condition . diabetes may also have a detrimental effect on the kidney 's filtering ability , leading to a condition known as diabetic nephropathy . the nerves of the legs and feet may also be damaged as part of the complication of diabetes , and may present as numbness , pain , or tingling sensation of the lower extremities , referred to as diabetic neuropathy . persons living with diabetes should examine their feet daily for the presence of wounds . retinopathy , nephropathy , and neuropathy are all known as microvascular complications of diabetes . diabetes may also cause narrowing of the large blood vessels of the body from inflammation and injury , giving rise to a condition known as atherosclerosis , which fuels the macrovascular complications of diabetes , which can be in the form of heart disease , stroke , or peripheral arterial disease . persons with diabetes should consistently follow-up with their physicians so that they could be regularly monitored for the presence of complications and could be treated in a timely manner . when do you need to see an endocrinologist ? it is recommended that persons with diabetes who have high blood sugar levels , with bothersome symptoms , and complications should see an endocrinologist . those who need insulin therapy would also benefit from an endocrinology consult . type 2 diabetes in the filipino : is it any different ? anyone can get diabetes young or old , rich or poor , male or female , filipino or not . in the philippines , according to the food and nutrition research institute-department of science and technology 8th national nutrition survey , diabetes prevalence based on fasting blood sugar has risen from 3.4 percent in 2003 to 5.4 percent in 2013. the greatest numbers of filipinos with diabetes are 50 to 69 years of age and wealthy and live in urban areas . not surprising since type 2 diabetes mellitus ( t2dm ) is both a genetic and a lifestyle disease linked to aging , unhealthy diets , physical inactivity , obesity and urbanization . about 90 to 95 percent of people with diabetes have t2 dm . risk factors include : age at or above 30 years , family history of diabetes , high blood pressure , abnormal cholesterol levels , polycystic ovary syndrome , gestational or pregnancy-related diabetes , intake of certain drugs , and sleep deprivation . people who were born premature , too heavy ( > /= 8 pounds ) or too small are also at risk for t2dm . type 2 diabetes is characterized by impairment in insulin secretion or action , which can lead to high blood sugar . high blood sugar can wreak havoc in the body circulation and immune system leading to infections , blindness , kidney failure , leg amputation , heart attacks and strokes . filipinos are especially prone to t2dm compared to other races . in fact , filipinos get diabetes and problems like hypertension , high cholesterol and heart disease at a lower body mass index ( bmi ) compared to caucasians . a person ’ s bmi is calculated by dividing one 's body weight in kilograms by the square of one ’ s height in meters . a bmi of 25 and above is considered overweight for caucasians , while a bmi of 23 and above is the cutoff for asians . one possible reason for the higher t2dm risk is that filipinos have more visceral fat despite having similar bmi or waistlines as their caucasian counterparts . visceral fat is the nasty fat inside the belly stored in or around the internal organs such as the liver , pancreas and intestines , which can lead to defective insulin action . in studies done in north america , filipino migrants have even been found to have higher rates of t2dm compared to other asians such as the japanese , chinese , korean and vietnamese . to add insult to injury , studies suggest that filipinos may also have more diabetes complications like eye and kidney disease compared to other races . but pinoys need not sulk about getting the short end of the stick . filipino or not , you can cut your diabetes risk . just eat right , move more , stay trim , sleep well , stress less and get checked . dr. joy arabelle fontanilla is the past president of the american association of clinical endocrinologists philippine chapter and head of the weight management center , st. lukes medical center-global city . the a to z of health information advocacy is a joint initiative of a group of medical specialists and supported by astra zeneca philippines aimed at raising public awareness on various diseases and providing health information and updates to the healthcare community . why do filipinos have high rates of diabetes ? not-so-fun facts : in the united states , 15.8 % of filipino men as opposed to 6.1 % of the overall male population have type 2 diabetes . filipina women are six times more likely than white women to have type 2 diabetes while controlling for diabetes risk factors . although filipinos have higher rates of obesity a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes compared to the overall u.s. population , even non-obese filipinos are more likely to acquire type 2 diabetes . overconsumption of refined carbohydrates i.e. , white rice can raise blood glucose levels and increase the risk of type 2 diabetes . however , qualitative studies have found that filipinos who reduce white rice intake are socially viewed as rejecting filipino culture . these findings exemplify how difficult it is for filipinos to make the necessary dietary changes to reduce their risk of type 2 diabetes . a simple way to help keep blood glucose stable is to fill your plate with 50 % veggies , 25 % rice , and 25 % protein . the filipino guide to natural diabetes management resiliency , hospitality , and strong family ties are some of the most vivid qualities of the typical filipino . but i believe there is no filipino trait more unparalleled than their love for food no wonder headlines have it that the philippines is a diabetes hotspot in the pacific . the number of diabetes cases in the country is climbing up each year as many of our countrymen are spending a lot of money and energy on maintenance therapy for it . many of the drugs are available and accessible , but many are their adverse effects and costs , too . this is why a portion of our population still believes and depends on natural therapy . although the newest medicines in the market are potent and promising , natural therapy can ( and may ) also be good and effective even modern science is a witness to this . here are a few ideas on beating diabetes the natural and non-chemical way : aloe vera even your teenage daughter or your niece in eighth grade knows that aloe vera is in her everyday hair shampoo or in her favorite skin care product . but do they or even you know that it may also help your 60-year-old mom with her diabetes ? according to studies , aloe vera has the potential of lowering blood sugar and boosting up insulin . in the market , aloe vera for diabetes comes in powders , extracts , and juices . cinnamon it may be your typical spice in the kitchen , but it may also be your next step in beating diabetes . studies have it that cinnamon can reduce sugar levels as well as lower body mass , body fat , and blood pressure ( which are very known risk factors of the disease ) . visit your doctor and talk to them about taking cinnamon as your everyday supplement for diabetes . bitter gourd is not a kid 's usual vegetable of choice , but it is and should be on the diet of any diabetic filipino out there . bitter gourd or ampalaya in filipino is one of 10 philippine herbal medicines . it is also a known supplement for diabetes due to its properties of reducing sugar levels and improving sugar tolerance . bitter is the taste , but better is the diabetic patient with this veggie on his or her menu . fenugreek an ingredient in cuisines , a component of feeds , a medicine to man , fenugreek is one of the world 's all-purpose herbs with all-around functions , especially in managing diabetes . it is known to bring down sugar digestion , increase insulin levels , and decrease the amount of cholesterol in the body . you can grab it in the market and drink it as tea , eat it as food , or gulp it as a capsule to keep your sugar levels on the right track . this herb is a newbie in the market . one interesting thing worth remembering about gymnema is that it means sugar destroyer in hindi . it is a great help in dealing with diabetes as it reduces sugar cravings , lowers sugar levels , increases insulin production , and fights the aggravating factors of the disease . this sugar destroyer is available in stores as a supplement in different capsule forms . 6. ginseng from the ancient era of kings and emperors to this present time of smartphones and social media , ginseng has always been a legendary plant with equally legendary health benefits . it is a popular and proven antioxidant and booster of immunity , energy and brain functions . as a diabetes supplement , it improves and enhances insulin production , sugar uptake , and pancreatic function and it comes in the form of tea , food , and pharmaceutical products in the market . serpentina another herb in folk medicine that has been addressing several ailments in the community is serpentina . studies show that this plant is able to carry out a multitude of actions in the human body , one of which is its antidiabetic power . it is easily and readily at hand in the form of supplements at your nearest drugstores . the king of bitters these seven plants are just tidbits of the hundreds of natural products out there claiming and proving themselves to be treatments and preventions of various sicknesses , from the simplest colds to the severest cancer . with a lot of choices on the list , which one is a really good deal for diabetes ? andrographis paniculata , like any other herbal product out there , is known and believed to have a wide range of effects for a wide range of sicknesses . simply known as serpentina , sinta , or king of bitters , it is a plant hailing from southeast asia with india and sri lanka as its primary native homes . it is a branched herb with a life cycle of one year and a height of half to one meter , having green and lanceolate leaves . serpentina has been in traditional medicine for many years , preventing and addressing infection , inflammation , and cancer . studies have it that this plant is a useful aid in diarrhea , diabetes , and conditions of the kidney and the liver . it has antioxidant , anti-fever , and immunostimulant effects in the human body , causing its ability to combat and prevent different maladies . so how does serpentina exactly work its magic on diabetes ? or the better question is , can serpentina really work its magic on diabetes ? there is actually a sufficient number of researches supporting the effectiveness of this plant in lowering blood sugar levels in the body . this action of serpentina is due to andrographolide . this substance is responsible for improving sugar uptake by adipose tissues , hinders the liver from making sugar , and halts the intestine from taking it in . all these actions of the andrographolide boil down to a subsequent decrease in the level of sugar in the blood , which is the main goal of therapy in treating any diabetic patient . on top of science is the rich history of the plant . serpentina has a huge part in traditional asian medicine the use of it is prevalent and patronized in india , sri lanka , pakistan , malaysia , indonesia , china , and thailand . it is also a common herbal remedy in the ayurvedic and unani systems of medicine . as a result , a lot of medicinal products containing serpentina are out in the market , sold and bought for its antidiabetic ability . a large chunk of these herbal preparations come in the form of powders and capsules for easy and quick consumption . how to manage and prevent diabetes for filipinos ? diabetes is a disease that impacts in 5 people in the philippines . worldwide , about 537 million adults aged 20 to 79 years old are affected a number expected to increase by 50 % in 20 years . it has afflicted over a million young people who are 19 years old and below , and nearly half of diabetic adults remain undiagnosed due to lack of information about this disease . diabetes management : you may wonder , how does living with the disease feel like ? since the causes of type 1 and 2 diabetes differ , so do their management . people with type 1 diabetes , where the pancreas can no longer produce insulin . the patient will have to administer the hormone externally for energy and blood glucose control . doctors will pick from 5 types of insulin rapid-acting , short-acting , intermediate-acting , long-acting , and premix and recommend their dose and frequency . while type 2 diabetes may also require insulin at a later stage , treatment usually starts out with dietary and lifestyle intervention ( improving their eating habits and embarking on an exercise program ) . if changes in diet becomes inadequate in managing blood sugar levels , then oral medication will be prescribed to manage blood sugar levels . diabetic diet : diabetic patients should follow the treatment solutions prescribed by their doctor to actively manage the disease and reduce the risk of complications . all patients should follow dietary treatment . as different people have varying calorie requirements , patients should consult a registered dietician to design a suitable menu for the management of the disease and stabilizing glucose . the general guidelines are as follows : have a balanced diet and have your meals at a regular time . also , dieticians and doctors may also advise patients eat less per meal but have more meals . this helps in stabilizing blood glucose levels . your diet should have a healthy and appropriate mix of carbohydrates . carbohydrates should be approximately 50 % of the total calorie intake . for example , around 750 kcal of calories ( equivalent to around 188g carbohydrate , i.e. , of 18 - 19 portions of carbohydrate exchange ) to be produced by carbohydrate in a 1500 kcal menu . the above carbohydrate exchange should be distributed evenly in main meals and snack time . 1 portion of carbohydrate exchange is equivalent to 10g of carbohydrate . patients can choose suitable number of grains , rhizome vegetables , fruits , and dairy according to the carbohydrate exchange method . dietary counselling would include emphasis on the avoidance of food and drinks that are rich in sugar or additional sweeteners to prevent surge of glucose as much as possible . foods that are high in saturated fat content such as animal organs should also be avoided to protect the cardiovascular system . abstinence of alcohol should also be followed as alcohol consumption can affect the efficacy of drugs and may lead to low blood glucose ( hypoglycemia ) . in unavoidable circumstances , men and women should limit themselves to 2 and 1 portions respectively . each portion works out to be 300ml of beer , 150ml of red wine , or 45ml of spirit , depending on one 's choice of a nightcap . oral anti-diabetic drugs ( oad ) : the prescriptions of oral anti-diabetic drugs will be given by doctor according to the body condition , drug allergies ( if any ) and condition of blood glucose control of individual patient . type : sulfonylureas function : stimulate the insulin secretion of pancreas example : tolbutamide , gliclazide , gliclazide mr , glimepiride , glipizide type : biguanides function : reduce the production of glucose in liver , increase the application of glucose by body tissue ( muscles ) and reduce the absorption of glucose in gastrointestinal tract example : metformin , metformin xr type : glucosidase inhibitors function : slow down the absorption of dextrose in small intestine to prevent too much glucose after meals example : acarbose type : glitazones function : increase the sensitivity of body to insulin so glucose would enter the cells and decrease the glucose level . example : pioglitazone type : dipeptidyl peptidase-4 enzyme inhibitors function : stimulate the insulin secretion of pancreas example : sitagliptin , vildagliptin , linagliptin , saxagliptin , alogliptin type : meglitinides or glinides function : stimulate the insulin secretion of pancreas example : repaglinide type : sglt2-inhibitors function : inhibit reabsorption of glucose in the kidney and lower blood sugar , e.g. , empagliflozin , dapagliflozin example : dapagliflozin , empagliflozin , canagliflozin insulin injections for diabetes : insulin is a hormone required by the body to use glucose for energy and helps balance your blood glucose levels . for type 1dm and late-stage type 2dm where the pancreas can longer produce insulin , diabetics would have to administer insulin externally to help regulate blood sugar levels . injection of insulin is a way similar to the normal secretion of insulin to manage glucose . this treatment is applied to type 1 patients and some of the type 2 patients whose glucose level can not be managed after application of oral hypoglycemic medications . injection of insulin can be classified into 5 durations of action of insulin , it would be rapid acting , short acting , intermediate acting , long acting and pre-mix insulin . the doctors will generally decide the type , dose of insulin and the frequency of injection required , and the injection can be done by the patients themselves after training . diabetes complications : if not well managed , the continued presence of high sugar levels in the bloodstream can lead to complications over time . the complications differ from those suffering from type 1 and type 2 diabetes . acute complications of type 1 diabetes : type 1 diabetes sufferers tend to experience the consequences of high glucose levels quickly as compared to type 2 diabetics . leaving high blood sugar levels to chance jeopardizes the metabolism of fat and protein , which doesn ’ t bode well , especially for type 1 diabetics . where insulin is scarce , the body breaks fat down into fuel . this creates a buildup of ketone bodies which can potentially cause ketoacidosis and life-threatening cases of diabetic coma . patients could also experience glycosuria , where sugars are passed out during urination ; as well as excessive urination ( polyuria ) and extreme thirst ( polydipsia ) arising from dehydration and electrolyte imbalance . chronic complications for type 2 diabetes : the complications of type 2 diabetes , on the other hand , put systems and organs at risk of destruction . as high blood sugar levels persist , patients are more vulnerable to cardiovascular diseases , kidney failure , or damage to one ’ s tissues and nerves . the latter can result in retinopathy leading to visual impairment and foot diseases such as ulcers , infections , and gangrene which may warrant lower limb amputation . unsurprisingly , foot care is a big part of living with type 2 diabetes . maintaining foot hygiene is the bare minimum , along with regular examination lest cuts and wounds on numb limbs go undetected . for the same reason , patients should never go barefoot , trim their toenails with care , and have calluses removed professionally . exercise should be limited to feet-friendly activities and investing in footwear that fits well and promotes blood circulation will prove worthwhile . diabetes prevention : as the saying goes , an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of care . living with diabetes is a huge undertaking , and its wiser to be more proactive than reactive . regular exercise and dietary management are two cornerstones of diabetes prevention , but what do these look like in practice ? for adults get 75 and 150 minutes of exercise of moderate and vigorous intensities respectively per week . that said , those who are gunning for a healthy bmi could use more activity . during mealtimes , choose complex over processed carbohydrates ; poultry , fish , and plant-based protein over red meat ; and water , coffee , and tea over sugary drinks . home-cooked meals are also a good idea if you ’ re using healthier fats and oils made with olives , avocados , and nuts . aside from working out and eating well , here are 3 other lifestyle adjustments that will keep you out of the woods . understanding diabetes : the bad news is that there ’ s no proven cure for diabetes . the good news ? prediabetes can be mitigated . as you would have learned by now , blood sugar levels sit front and center in diabetes management , treatment , and prevention . now that you know the risks , causes , and manifestations of diabetes , you can be more conscious about your diet , exercise regime , and health screenings . chronic illnesses like diabetes can turn critical because of possible complications and lifetime management . whether you ’ re at risk or not , being financially prepared is key to protecting your savings and investments from being wiped out in case of illness . aside from philhealth and hmo , you can add products such as sunfit and well to help cover the costs of prevention , diagnosis , recovery , and treatment . you may also ask a sun life financial advisor to know more health protection plans that fit your budget . type 2 diabetes is a condition that happens because of a problem in the way the body regulates and uses sugar as a fuel . that sugar also is called glucose . this long-term condition results in too much sugar circulating in the blood . eventually , high blood sugar levels can lead to disorders of the circulatory , nervous and immune systems . in type 2 diabetes , there are primarily two problems . the pancreas does not produce enough insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into the cells . and cells respond poorly to insulin and take in less sugar . type 2 diabetes used to be known as adult-onset diabetes , but both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can begin during childhood and adulthood . type 2 is more common in older adults . but the increase in the number of children with obesity has led to more cases of type 2 diabetes in younger people . there 's no cure for type 2 diabetes . losing weight , eating well and exercising can help manage the disease . if diet and exercise are n't enough to control blood sugar , diabetes medications or insulin therapy may be recommended . what is diabetes ? diabetes is a chronic illness that is a result of having excessive glucose ( sugar ) in your bloodstream . the primary cause of this disease is when the pancreas is unable to produce enough insulin to regulate glucose levels which in turn causes a spike in your blood sugar . having diabetes can put you at risk for other chronic ailments like heart disease , vision problems , and even impotence in men . what are the kinds of diabetes ? type 1 diabetes is also known as insulin-dependent diabetes or juvenile diabetes . this is considered to be more dangerous than type 2 diabetes and typically occurs in children and young adults . while the exact cause of type 1 diabetes is still unknown , family medical history can also be a risk factor in 10 % to 15 % of patients diagnosed with type 1 diabetes . those with other known autoimmune hormone-related diseases are also prone to developing this type of diabetes . meanwhile , those with type 2 diabetes or adult-onset diabetes are usually diagnosed after the age of 40. about 90 % to 95 % of those with diabetes have this kind of diabetes . according to some studies , type 2 diabetes has slowly become one of the fastest growing epidemics in this modern age . obese children are also at risk of developing this type of diabetes as unhealthy food options are more readily accessible and affordable for the masses . common symptoms you should consider consulting your doctor if you experience any of the following symptoms which may indicate early signs of diabetes like : unexpected weight loss slow healing wounds blurred vision frequent urination unexplained fatigue how do you get diagnosed ? your doctor may perform blood tests to measure and determine the type of diabetes and the severity of your condition . a urine test may also be necessary to see if there are any abnormalities in your ketone levels which is usually a result of low insulin levels in your blood . general disclaimer always consults your doctor before drinking any kind of medication , including vitamins . keep in mind that your physician is in the best position to prescribe the right kind of treatment for your condition . immediately stop using a product if you experience negative side effects . type 2 diabetes ( t2dm ) type 2 diabetes , or t2dm is the most common form of diabetes mellitus . where type 1 diabetes occurs due to a lack of insulin secretion in the body , type 2 diabetes is caused by the inefficient use of insulin or faulty signaling in the cells , also known as insulin resistance . common symptoms of type 2 diabetes t2dm is also known as a silent disease with less noticeable symptoms , especially in the very beginning . overtime , the symptoms that appear share some similarities with type 1 diabetes . if your blood glucose level has been high for a prolonged period of time , these are the symptoms that may appear . yeast infections yeast thrives off glucose . A high blood glucose level is conducive for yeast to thrive , resulting in yeast infections . these infections can grow in any warm , moist fold of skin such as between fingers and toes , under the breasts and in or around sex organs . slow-healing sores or wounds prolonged periods of high blood sugar can also affect your blood flow . this causes nerve damage that makes it hard for your body to regenerate and heal from cuts and other wounds . pain or numbness in the feet or legs pain and numbness in your lower limbs may also be another sign of nerve damage . causes of type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes is largely a product of weight gain from a rich diet and sedentary lifestyle . other risk factors include age and family history of diabetes , though these play a smaller role . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes and prevent some of the serious problems diabetes can cause . the more you know , the better you can manage your diabetes . share this booklet with your family and friends so they will understand more about diabetes . also make sure to ask your health care team any questions you might have . you can learn how to take care of your diabetes . what is diabetes ? diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . glucose comes from the food you eat and is also made in your liver and muscles . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . your pancreas an organ , located between your stomach and spine , that helps with digestion releases a hormone it makes , called insulin , into your blood . insulin helps your blood carry glucose to all your body cells . sometimes your body does n't make enough insulin or the insulin does n't work the way it should . glucose then stays in your blood and does n't reach your cells . your blood glucose levels get too high and can cause diabetes or prediabetes . over time , having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems . what is prediabetes ? prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . with prediabetes , your chances of getting type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and stroke are higher . with some weight loss and moderate physical activity , you can delay or prevent type 2 diabetes . you can even return to normal glucose levels , possibly without taking any medicines . caution : take steps to prevent type 2 diabetes now . prediabetes diabetes normal what are the signs and symptoms of diabetes ? the signs and symptoms of diabetes are being very thirsty urinating often feeling very hungry feeling very tired losing weight without trying sores that heal slowly dry , itchy skin feelings of pins and needles in your feet losing feeling in your feet blurry eyesight some people with diabetes do n't have any of these signs or symptoms . the only way to know if you have diabetes is to have your doctor do a blood test . what kind of diabetes do you have ? the three main types of diabetes are type 1 , type 2 , and gestational diabetes . people can develop diabetes at any age . both women and men can develop diabetes . type 1 diabetes type 1 diabetes , which used to be called juvenile diabetes , develops most often in young people ; however , type 1 diabetes can also develop in adults . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin because the body 's immune system , which normally protects you from infection by getting rid of bacteria , viruses , and other harmful substances , has attacked and destroyed the cells that make insulin . treatment for type 1 diabetes includes taking shots , also called injections , of insulin . sometimes taking medicines by mouth . making healthy food choices . being physically active . controlling your blood pressure levels . blood pressure is the force of blood flow inside your blood vessels . controlling your cholesterol levels . cholesterol is a type of fat in your body 's cells , in your blood , and in many foods . type 2 diabetes type 2 diabetes , which used to be called adult-onset diabetes , can affect people at any age , even children . however , type 2 diabetes develops most often in middle- aged and older people . people who are overweight and inactive are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . type 2 diabetes usually begins with insulin resistance condition that occurs when fat , muscle , and liver cells do not use insulin to carry glucose into the body 's cells to use for energy . as a result , the body needs more insulin to help glucose enter cells . at first , the pancreas keeps up with the added demand by making more insulin . over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . if your pancreas can no longer make enough insulin , you will need to treat your type 2 diabetes . treatment for type 2 diabetes includes using diabetes medicines making healthy food choices being physically active controlling your blood pressure levels controlling your cholesterol levels gestational diabetes gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . all women have insulin resistance late in their pregnancy . if the pancreas does n't make enough insulin during pregnancy , a woman develops gestational diabetes . overweight or obese women have a higher chance of gestational diabetes . also , gaining too much weight during pregnancy may increase your likelihood of developing gestational diabetes . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . however , a woman who has had gestational diabetes is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes later in life . babies born to mothers who had gestational diabetes are also more likely to develop obesity and type 2 diabetes . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what i need to know about gestational diabetes at why do you need to take care of your diabetes ? over time , diabetes can lead to serious problems with your blood vessels , heart , nerves , kidneys , mouth , eyes , and feet . these problems can lead to an amputation , which is surgery to remove a damaged toe , foot , or leg , for example . the most serious problem caused by diabetes is heart disease . when you have diabetes , you are more than twice as likely as people without diabetes to have heart disease or a stroke . with diabetes , you may not have the usual signs or symptoms of a heart attack . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . who is part of your health care team ? most people with diabetes get care from primary care providers , such as internists , family physicians , or pediatricians . a team of health care providers can also improve your diabetes care . in addition to a primary care provider , your health care team may include an endocrinologist for more specialized diabetes care a dietitian , a nurse , or a certified diabetes educator experts who can provide information about managing diabetes a counselor or mental health professional a pharmacist a dentist an ophthalmologist or an optometrist for eye care a podiatrist for foot care if diabetes makes you feel sad or angry , or if you have other problems that worry you , you should talk with a counselor or mental health professional . your doctor or certified diabetes educator can help you find a counselor . talk with your doctor about what vaccines and immunizations , or shots , you should get to keep from getting sick . preventing illness is an important part of taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . be sure you understand everything you need to know about taking care of your diabetes . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . take care of your diabetes each day do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . these things may seem like a lot to do at first . just make small changes until these steps become a normal part of your day . follow your healthy eating plan ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . this plan , often called medical nutrition therapy , will include regular monitoring by your dietitian and education about how to adjust your eating habits as the need occurs . medical nutrition therapy is usually covered by insurance or medicare as long as your doctor refers you . your dietitian can help you plan meals that include foods that you and your family like and that are good for you . your healthy eating plan will include breads , cereals , rice , and whole grains fruits and vegetables meat and meat substitutes dairy products healthy fats your plan will also help you learn how to eat the right amount , or portions , of food . making good food choices will help you reach and stay at a healthy weight keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels under control prevent heart and blood vessel disease if you take insulin , look at the white boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . do n't skip meals , especially if you 've already taken your insulin , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . learn more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . if you dont take insulin , look at the blue boxes like this one for action steps . action steps if you do n't take insulin follow your healthy eating plan . do n't skip meals , especially if you take diabetes medicines , because your blood glucose levels may drop too low . read more about how to handle low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia , in the section learn about high and low blood glucose levels . eat several small meals during the day instead of big meals . read more about healthy eating plans in what i need to know about eating and diabetes at be physically active physical activity helps you stay healthy . physical activity is especially good if you have diabetes because it helps you reach or stay at a healthy weight helps insulin work better to lower your blood glucose levels is good for your heart and lungs gives you more energy even small amounts of physical activity help manage diabetes , such as when you are physically active at work or home . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . not all physical activity has to take place at the same time . increase daily activity by decreasing time spent watching tv or at the computer . children and adolescents should limit screen time not related to school to less than 2 hours a day . limiting screen time can help you meet your physical activity goal . people with diabetes should always talk with a doctor before starting a new physical activity program . do aerobic activities , such as brisk walking , which use the body 's large muscles to make the heart beat faster . the large muscles are those of the upper and lower arms and legs and those that control head , shoulder , and hip movements . do activities to strengthen muscles and bone , such as sit-ups or lifting weights . aim for two times a week . stretch to increase flexibility , lower stress , and help prevent muscle soreness after physical activity . many activities can help your child and your family stay active and have fun . consider activities that they might enjoy and can stick with , such as playing basketball dancing to music with friends taking a walk or a bike ride physical activity helps you stay healthy . action steps if you take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . don ’ t start a physical activity program when your blood glucose levels are high or if you have ketones in your blood or urine . read more about ketones in the section monitor your diabetes . do n't be physically active right before you go to bed because it could cause low blood glucose while you sleep . action steps if you do n't take insulin see your doctor before becoming physically active . ask your doctor about whether you need to eat before you are physically active . when you are being physically active , carry glucose tablets or a carbohydrate-rich snack or drink with you , such as fruit or juice , in case your blood glucose levels go too low . read more about increasing your physical activity in what i need to know about physical activity and diabetes at take your medicines as prescribed if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . if you have type 2 diabetes and are unable to reach your target blood glucose levels with a healthy eating plan and physical activity , diabetes medicines may help . diabetes medicines most people with type 2 diabetes use medicines other than insulin shots . people with type 2 diabetes use medicine to help their blood glucose levels stay in their target range . if your body makes insulin and the insulin does n't lower your blood glucose levels enough , you may need to take one or more medicines . diabetes medicines come in pill and shot form . some people take diabetes medicines once a day and other medicines more often . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . sometimes , people who take diabetes medicines may also need insulin shots for a while . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . if you get sick or have surgery , your diabetes medicines may no longer work to lower your blood glucose levels . always check with your doctor before you stop taking your diabetes medicines . insulin shots only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take and which of the following ways to take insulin is best for you : insulin shot . you 'll use a needle attached to a syringe a hollow tube with a plunger that you fill with a dose of insulin . some people use an insulin pen , a pen like device with a needle and a cartridge of insulin . never share insulin needles or insulin pens , even with family . insulin pump . an insulin pump is a small device filled with insulin that you wear on your belt or keep in your pocket . the pump connects to a small , plastic tube and a small needle . you or your doctor inserts the needle under your skin . the needle can stay in for several days . insulin jet injector . this device sends a fine spray of insulin through your skin with high-pressure air instead of a needle . insulin injection port . you or your doctor inserts a small tube just beneath your skin , where it remains in place for several days . you can inject insulin into the end of the tube instead of through your skin . read more about ways to take insulin in alternative devices for taking insulin at only a doctor can prescribe insulin . your doctor can tell you how much insulin you should take . other medicines your doctor may prescribe other medicines to help with problems related to diabetes , such as aspirin for heart health cholesterol-lowering medicines for high blood pressure remembering to take your medicines at the correct times each day can be challenging . many people find that keeping a weekly pill box with separate boxes for each day , and even separate boxes for morning and evening , can help . also ask your health care team to update your list of medicines at each visit so you always have an accurate list of what medicines to take and when . read more about diabetes and medicines in what I need to know about diabetes medicines at monitor your diabetes check your blood glucose levels checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . if your blood has too much or too little glucose , you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . a member of your health care team will show you how to check your blood glucose levels using a blood glucose meter . your health care team can teach you how to prick your finger to get a drop of blood for testing use your meter to find out your blood glucose level from your drop of blood read more in continuous glucose monitoring at your health insurance or medicare may pay for the blood glucose meter and test strips you need . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check before and after eating , before and after physical activity , before bed , and sometimes in the middle of the night . make sure to keep a record of your blood glucose self-checks . target range for blood glucose levels most people with diabetes should try to keep their blood glucose levels as close as possible to the level of someone who doesnt have diabetes . this normal target range is about 70 to 130. the closer to normal your blood glucose levels are , the lower your chance of developing serious health problems . ask your doctor what your target levels are and when you should check your blood glucose levels with a meter . make copies of the chart in the section your diabetes care records to take with you when you visit your doctor . reaching your target range all of the time can be hard . remember , the closer you get to your target range , the better you will feel . the a1 c test another test for blood glucose , the a1 c also called the hemoglobin a1 c test , hb a1 c , or glycohemoglobin testis a blood test that reflects the average level of glucose in your blood during the past 2 to 3 months . you should have the a1 c test at least twice a year . if your result is not on target , your doctor may have you take the test more often to see if your a1 c improves . for the test , your doctor will draw a sample of your blood during an office visit or send you to a lab to have your blood drawn . your a1 c test result is given as a percentage . your a1 c result plus the record of your blood glucose numbers show whether your blood glucose levels are under control . if your a1 c result is too high , you may need to change your diabetes treatment plan . your health care team can help you decide what part of your plan to change . if your a1 c result is on target , then your diabetes treatment plan is working . the lower your a1 c result , the lower your chance of having diabetes problems . talk with your doctor about what your a1 c target should be . your personal target may be above or below the target shown in the chart . a1 c targets target for most people with diabetes below 7 percent time to change my diabetes care plan 8 percent or above a1 c targets can also depend on how long you have had diabetes whether or not you have other health problems read more about a1 c targets at tests for ketones you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. your body makes ketones when you burn fat instead of glucose for energy . if you have too many ketones , you are more likely to have a serious condition called ketoacidosis . if not treated , ketoacidosis can cause death . signs of ketoacidosis are vomiting weakness fast breathing sweet-smelling breath ketoacidosis is more likely in people with type 1 diabetes . your doctor or diabetes educator will show you how to test for ketones . keep daily records make copies of the daily diabetes record at the end of this booklet . then , write down the results of your blood glucose checks each day . you may also want to record what you ate , how you felt , and whether you were physically active . bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . they can use your records to see whether you need changes in your diabetes medicines or in your healthy eating plan . action steps if you take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take insulin the amount and type of insulin you take what types of physical activity you do and for how long when and what you eat whether you have ketones in your blood or urine when you are sick action steps if you do n't take insulin keep a daily record of your blood glucose levels the times of day you take your medicines what types of physical activity you do and for how long learn about high and low blood glucose levels sometimes , no matter how hard you try to keep your blood glucose levels in your target range , they will be too high or too low . blood glucose that 's too high or too low can make you feel sick . if you try to control your high or low blood glucose and cant , you may become even sicker and need help . talk with your doctor to learn how to handle these emergencies . learn about high blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . see the chart on page 54. high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . high blood glucose can happen if you miss taking your diabetes medicines eat too much do n't get enough physical activity have an infection get sick are stressed take medicines that can cause high blood glucose be sure to tell your doctor about other medicines you take . when you 're sick , be sure to check your blood glucose levels and keep taking your diabetes medicines . read more about how to take care of yourself when you 're sick in the section take care of your diabetes during special times or events . signs that your blood glucose levels may be too high are the following : feeling thirsty feeling weak or tired headaches urinating often having trouble paying attention blurry vision yeast infections very high blood glucose may also make you feel sick to your stomach . if your blood glucose levels are high much of the time , or if you have symptoms of high blood glucose , call your doctor . you may need a change in your healthy eating plan , physical activity plan , or medicines . learn about low blood glucose levels if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . low blood glucose can come on fast and can be caused by taking too much diabetes medicine missing or delaying a meal being more physically active than usual drinking alcoholic beverages sometimes , medicines you take for other health problems can cause your blood glucose levels to drop . signs your blood glucose levels may be too low are the following : hunger dizziness or shakiness confusion being pale sweating more weakness anxiety or moodiness headaches a fast heartbeat if your blood glucose levels drop lower , you could have severe hypoglycemia , where you pass out or have a seizure . a seizure occurs when cells in the brain release a rush of energy that can cause changes in behavior or muscle contractions . some seizures are life threatening . if you have any of these symptoms , check your blood glucose levels . if your blood glucose levels are less than 70 , have one of the following right away : three or four glucose tablets one serving of glucose gel . the amount equal to 15 grams of carbohydrates 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of fruit juice 1/2 cup , or 4 ounces , of a regular non diet soft drink 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of milk five or six pieces of hard candy 1 tablespoon of sugar , syrup , or honey have one of these foods or drinks when your blood glucose levels are low . after 15 minutes , check your blood glucose levels again . repeat these steps until your blood glucose levels are 70 or above . if it will be at least 1 hour before your next meal , eat a snack . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . a glucagon kit has a vial of glucagon , a syringe , and a needle to inject the glucagon . given as a shot , the glucagon quickly raises blood glucose . if you have severe hypoglycemia , you 'll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon kit is not available . action steps if you take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor if you 've passed out from low blood glucose . ask your doctor about glucagon . glucagon is a medicine that raises blood glucose . show your family , friends , and coworkers how to give you a glucagon shot when you have severe hypoglycemia . when you have severe hypoglycemia , someone should call 911 for help if a glucagon shot is not available . action steps if you do n't take insulin tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of the day or night , several times in a row . tell your doctor about other medicines you are taking . ask your doctor whether your diabetes medicines might cause low blood glucose . read more about low blood glucose in hypoglycemia at tell your doctor if you have low blood glucose , especially at the same time of day or night , several times in a row . prevent diabetes problems taking care of your diabetes every day will help your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels stay in your target ranges . caring for your diabetes can also help prevent other health problems over the years . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . types of diabetes problems diabetes problems can damage parts of the body such as the heart blood vessels eyes kidneys nerves heart and blood vessel disease can lead to heart attacks and strokes . nerve damage can lead to a loss of feeling in the feet , which may lead to an amputation . you will want to take steps to prevent these diabetes problems . read more about preventing diabetes problems in the following booklets at these booklets are also available in Spanish and large-print versions : prevent diabetes problems : keep your diabetes under control prevent diabetes problems : keep your eyes healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your feet healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your heart and blood vessels healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your kidneys healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your mouth healthy prevent diabetes problems : keep your nervous system healthy take care of your diabetes during special times or events diabetes is part of your life . you can learn how to take care of yourself and your diabetes when you 're sick , when you 're at school or work , when you 're away from home , when an emergency or a natural disaster happens , or when you 're thinking about having a baby or are pregnant . when you 're sick having a cold , the flu , or an infection can raise your blood glucose levels . being sick puts stress on your body . your body releases hormones to deal with the stress and to fight the sickness . higher hormone levels can also cause high blood glucose levels . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . the first step is to talk with your health care team and write down how often to check your blood glucose levels whether you should check for ketones in your blood or urine whether you should change your usual dose of your diabetes medicines what to eat and drink when to call your doctor action steps if you take insulin take your insulin , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . ask your health care team about how to adjust your insulin dose based on your blood glucose test results . action steps if you do n't take insulin take your diabetes medicines , even if you are sick and have been throwing up . people who are sick sometimes feel as though they cant eat as much or cant keep food down , which can cause low blood glucose levels . consuming carbohydrate-rich drinks or snacks can help prevent low blood glucose . if you are sick , your health care team may recommend the following : check your blood glucose levels at least four times a day and write down the results in your record book . keep your results handy so you can report the results to your health care team . keep taking your diabetes medicines , even if you cant eat . drink at least 1 cup , or 8 ounces , of water or other calorie-free , caffeine-free liquid every hour while you 're awake . if you cant eat your usual food , try eating or drinking any of the following to prevent low blood glucose levels : juice saltine crackers dry toast soup broth or bouillon ice pops or sherbet gelatin that is n't sugar-free milk yogurt soda that is n't sugar-free your doctor may ask that you call right away if your blood glucose levels are above 240 even though you 've taken your diabetes medicines your urine or blood ketone levels are above normal you vomit more than once you have diarrhea for more than 6 hours you have trouble breathing you have a high fever you cant think clearly or you feel more drowsy than usual you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . when you 're at school or work take care of your diabetes when you 're at school or at work : follow your healthy eating plan . take your medicines and check your blood glucose levels as usual . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . keep snacks nearby and carry some with you at all times to treat low blood glucose . if you have trained diabetes staff at your school or work , tell them that you have diabetes . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . when you 're away from home these tips can help you when you 're away from home : get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . follow your healthy eating plan as much as possible when you eat out . always carry a snack with you in case you have to wait for a waiter to serve you . limit alcoholic beverages . ask your health care team how many alcoholic beverages you can safely drink . eat something when you drink to prevent low blood glucose . if you 're taking a long trip by car , check your blood glucose levels before driving . stop and check your blood glucose levels every 2 hours . always carry your diabetes medicines and supplies in the car where you can reach them in case your blood glucose levels drop too low . in case you cant leave for home on time , bring twice the amount of diabetes supplies and medicines you normally need . take comfortable , well-fitting shoes on vacation . you 'll probably be walking more than usual . keep your medical insurance card , emergency phone numbers , and a first aid kit handy . wear or carry an identification tag or card that says you have diabetes . if you 're going to be away for a long time , ask your doctor for a written prescription for your diabetes medicines and the name of a doctor in the place you 're going to visit . do n't count on buying extra supplies when you 're traveling , especially if you 're going to another country . different countries use different kinds of diabetes medicines . when you 're flying on a plane these tips can help you when you 're flying on a plane : ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines , especially your insulin , if you 're traveling across time zones . take a letter from your doctor stating you have diabetes . the letter should include a list of all the medical supplies and medicines you need on the plane . in the letter , the doctor should also include a list of any devices that should n't go through an x-ray machine . carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . if you use an insulin pump , ask airport security to check the device by hand . x-ray machines can damage insulin pumps , whether the pump is on your body or in your luggage . when on a plane , get up from your seat and walk around when possible . read more about planning for travel and travel safety if you have diabetes in have diabetes . will travel . at bring food for meals and snacks on the plane . action steps if you take insulin when you travel , take a special insulated bag to carry your insulin to keep it from freezing or getting too hot bring extra supplies for taking insulin and testing your blood glucose levels in case of loss or breakage ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for taking insulin and testing blood glucose action steps if you do n't take insulin when you travel , ask your health care team in advance how to adjust your medicines if you 're traveling across time zones carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane ask your doctor for a letter saying you have diabetes and need to carry supplies for testing blood glucose when an emergency or a natural disaster happens everyone with diabetes should be prepared for emergencies and natural disasters , such as power outages or hurricanes . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes , such as a blood glucose meter , lancets , and testing strips your diabetes medicines insulin , syringes , and an insulated bag to keep insulin cool , if you take insulin a glucagon kit if you take insulin or if recommended by your doctor glucose tablets and other food or drinks to treat low blood glucose antibiotic cream or ointment a copy of your medical information , including a list of your conditions , medicines , and recent lab test results a list of your prescription names with dosage information and prescription numbers from your pharmacy phone numbers for the American red cross and other disaster relief groups you also might want to include some food that does n't spoil , such as canned or dried food , along with bottled water . read more about preparing for an emergency at the centers for disease control and prevention emergency preparedness and you website at preparedness . if you 're a woman and planning a pregnancy keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . even before you become pregnant , your blood glucose levels should be close to the normal range . your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you 're already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . you can take steps to bring your blood glucose levels close to normal . your insulin needs may change when you 're pregnant . your doctor may want you to take more insulin and check your blood glucose levels more often . if you plan to have a baby , work with your health care team to get your blood glucose levels as close to the normal range as possible see a doctor who has experience taking care of pregnant women with diabetes do n't smoke , drink alcoholic beverages , or use harmful drugs follow your healthy eating plan be sure to have your eyes , heart and blood vessels , blood pressure , and kidneys checked . your doctor should also check for nerve damage . pregnancy can make some health problems worse . read more about diabetes and pregnancy in what I need to know about preparing for pregnancy if I have diabetes at your health care team can work with you to get your blood glucose levels under control before you try to get pregnant . if you 're already pregnant , see your doctor right away . your diabetes care records make copies of the charts in this section . these charts list important things you should discuss with your doctor at each visit . things to discuss with your health care team at each visit date : whom you visited : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood glucose levels share your blood glucose records . your doctor will ask how you are checking your blood glucose levels to make sure you are doing it right . mention if you often have low or high blood glucose . Shared blood glucose records ? checked meter ? practiced blood glucose reading ? shared high or low blood glucose ? your weight talk about how much you should weigh . talk about ways to reach your target weight that will work for you.my weight now is . my target weight is . steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your blood pressure ask about ways to reach your target . the target for most people with diabetes is below 140/80 unless your doctor helps you set a different target . my blood pressure now is . my target blood pressure is . steps to take : your medicines talk about any problems you have had with your medicines . ask if you should take a low-dose aspirin every day to lower your chance of getting heart disease . Shared medicine problems ? take aspirin ? yes no steps to take : your feet ask to have your feet checked for problems . talk about any problems you are having with your feet , such as numbness , tingling , or sores that heal slowly . Checked feet ? shared problems ? steps to help with my feet : your physical activity plan talk about how often you are physically active , the type of physical activity you do , and any problems you have when being physically active . shared activities ? steps to take : your information things to remember check off what you covered , or write the result of your visit . your healthy eating plan talk about what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat . shared eating habits ? steps to take : your feelings if you feel stressed , ask about ways to cope . talk about whether you are feeling sad . Shared stress and problems ? steps to take : your smoking if you smoke , ask for help with quitting . shared smoking habits ? steps to take : this chart lists important tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year . tests , exams , and vaccines to get at least once or twice a year test instructions results or dates a1 ctest have this blood test at least twice a year . your result will tell you what your average blood glucose level was for the past 2 to 3 months . get a blood test to check your total cholesterol aim for below 200 ldl , or bad , cholesterol aim for below 100 hdl , or good , cholesterol : aim for above 40 ; women : aim for above 50 triglycerides aim for below 150 date : total cholesterol : ldl : hdl : triglycerides : next test : kidney function tests once a year , get a urine test to check for protein . at least once a year , get a blood test to check for creatinine . Date : urine protein : creatinine : next test : test instructions results or dates dilated eye exam see an eye doctor once a year for a complete eye exam that includes using drops in your eyes to dilate your pupils . if you are pregnant , have a complete eye exam in your first 3 months of pregnancy . have another complete eye exam 1 year after your baby is born . see your dentist twice a year for a cleaning and checkup . get pneumonia vaccine if you are younger than 64. if you 're older than 64 and your shot was more than 5 years ago , get another vaccine . get a flu shot each year . get hepatitis vaccine if you are age 19 to 59 and have not had this vaccine . consider getting this vaccine if you are 60 or older and have not had this vaccine . date of 1st dose : date of 2nd dose : date of 3rd dose : 55 daily diabetes record page week starting other blood glucose breakfast blood glucose medicine lunch blood glucose medicine dinner blood glucose medicine bedtime blood glucose medicine notes : you can also find a food and activity tracker at points to remember diabetes is when your blood glucose , also called blood sugar , is too high . blood glucose is the main type of sugar found in your blood and your main source of energy . prediabetes is when the amount of glucose in your blood is above normal yet not high enough to be called diabetes . in type 1 diabetes , your body no longer makes insulin or enough insulin . type 2 diabetes develops when , over time , the pancreas does n't make enough insulin when blood sugar levels increase , such as after meals . people who are overweight and inactive are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes . gestational diabetes can develop when a woman is pregnant . pregnant women make hormones that can lead to insulin resistance . gestational diabetes most often goes away after the baby is born . the best way to take care of your health is to work with your health care team to keep your blood glucose , blood pressure , and cholesterol levels in your target range . targets are numbers you aim for . when you see members of your health care team , ask lots of questions . prepare a list of questions before your visit . do four things each day to help your blood glucose levels stay in your target range : follow your healthy eating plan . be physically active . take your medicines as prescribed . monitor your diabetes . ask your doctor to give you the name of someone trained to help you create a healthy eating plan , such as a dietitian . people with diabetes should aim for 30 to 60 minutes of activity most days of the week . children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes who are 10 to 17 years old should aim for 60 minutes of activity every day . see your doctor before becoming physically active . check your blood glucose levels before , during , and after physical activity . your doctor may prescribe you diabetes medicines that work best for you and your lifestyle . if you have type 1 diabetes , you need insulin shots if your body has stopped making insulin or if it does n't make enough . some people with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes also need to take insulin shots . ask your health care team when you should take your diabetes medicines . be sure to tell your doctor if your medicines make you feel sick or if you have any other problems . checking and recording your blood glucose levels can help you monitor and better manage your diabetes . ask your doctor how often you should check your blood glucose levels . you may need to check your blood or urine for ketones if you 're sick or if your blood glucose levels are above 240. bring your blood glucose records to all visits with your health care team . if your blood glucose levels stay above 180 for more than 1 to 2 hours , they may be too high . high blood glucose , also called hyperglycemia , means you do n't have enough insulin in your body . if your blood glucose levels drop below 70 , you have low blood glucose , also called hypoglycemia . if you take diabetes medicines that can cause low blood glucose , always carry food for emergencies . you should also wear a medical identification bracelet or necklace that says you have diabetes . if you take insulin , keep a prescription glucagon kit at home and at other places where you often go . if you have severe hypoglycemia , youll need someone to help bring your blood glucose levels back to normal by giving you a glucagon shot . you can do a lot to prevent diabetes problems : follow your healthy eating plan every day . be physically active every day . take your medicines every day . check your blood glucose levels every day . you should have a plan for managing your diabetes when you 're sick . you should call your doctor if you have questions about taking care of yourself . tell your teachers , friends , or close coworkers that you have diabetes and teach them about the signs of low blood glucose . you may need their help if your blood glucose levels drop too low . get all your vaccines and immunizations , or shots , before you travel . find out what shot you need for where you 're going , and make sure you get the right shots on time . when traveling , carry your diabetes medicines and your blood testing supplies with you on the plane . never put these items in your checked baggage . always have a disaster kit ready . include everything you need to take care of your diabetes in the disaster kit . keeping your blood glucose levels near normal before and during pregnancy helps protect both you and your baby . if you 're already pregnant and you have diabetes , see your doctor right away . Type 2 diabetes is a chronic metabolic condition that affects the way your body metabolizes sugar ( glucose ) , an important source of fuel for the body . in type 2 diabetes , your body either resists the effects of insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into your cells or does n't produce enough insulin to maintain normal glucose levels . what causes type 2 diabetes ? the main cause of type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . insulin resistance happens when cells in your muscles , fat and liver don ’ t respond as they should to insulin . insulin is a hormone your pancreas makes that ’ s essential for life and regulating blood sugar levels . if your body is n't responding to insulin properly , your pancreas has to make more insulin to try to overcome your increasing blood glucose levels ( hyperinsulinemia ) . if your cells become too resistant to insulin and your pancreas can ’ t make enough insulin to overcome it , it leads to type 2 diabetes . several factors can contribute to insulin resistance , including : genetics . excess body fat , especially in your belly and around your organs ( visceral fat ) . physical inactivity . eating highly processed , high-carbohydrate foods and saturated fats frequently . certain medications , like long-term corticosteroid use . hormonal disorders , like hypothyroidism and cushing syndrome . chronic stress and a lack of quality sleep . what is insulin ? insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas , a gland located behind the stomach . it plays a crucial role in regulating blood sugar ( glucose ) levels . when you eat , your digestive system breaks down carbohydrates into glucose , which enters the bloodstream . in response to rising blood sugar levels , the pancreas releases insulin . the main functions of insulin include : facilitating glucose uptake : insulin enables cells in the muscles , fat , and liver to absorb glucose from the bloodstream . this allows cells to use glucose for energy . inhibiting glucose production : insulin suppresses the liver 's production of glucose . between meals , when blood sugar levels drop , the pancreas reduces insulin secretion , and the liver releases stored glucose to maintain normal blood sugar levels . promoting glycogen synthesis : insulin helps convert excess glucose into glycogen , a form of stored glucose , in the liver and muscles . this stored glycogen can be released when energy is needed . inhibiting fat breakdown : insulin also plays a role in inhibiting the breakdown of fats in fat cells . when insulin levels are high , the body tends to store excess calories as fat . in type 2 diabetes , the body may not use insulin effectively , leading to insulin resistance . this can result in the pancreas producing more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not be enough to regulate blood sugar levels , leading to elevated glucose in the bloodstream . maintaining proper insulin function is essential for overall health , and disruptions in insulin production or utilization can lead to conditions like diabetes . management of diabetes often involves strategies to regulate insulin levels , either through lifestyle modifications , medications , or insulin therapy . insulin resistance : in type 2 diabetes , the body 's cells become resistant to the action of insulin . insulin is needed to allow sugar ( glucose ) to enter cells for energy . when cells resist insulin 's signal , glucose builds up in the bloodstream , leading to high blood sugar levels . causes and risk factors : genetics : family history of diabetes can increase the risk . certain ethnic groups ( e.g. , african american , hispanic , native american ) are more prone . weight : being overweight or obese is a significant risk factor . physical inactivity : lack of exercise can contribute to insulin resistance . unhealthy diet : high consumption of processed foods , sugary beverages , and a lack of fiber . medical conditions : metabolic syndrome : a cluster of conditions ( abdominal obesity , high blood pressure , high triglycerides , low hdl cholesterol ) increases diabetes risk . polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : common in women and associated with insulin resistance . age and gender : risk increases with age , especially after 45. women with a history of gestational diabetes are at higher risk . symptoms : early symptoms : increased thirst ( polydipsia ) and hunger : experiencing excessive thirst and hunger . frequent urination : needing to urinate often , especially at night . fatigue : feeling tired and lethargic . tingling or numbness in your hands or feet dry skin . unexplained weight loss . advanced symptoms : blurred vision . slow wound healing . recurrent infections . people assigned female at birth ( afab ) may experience frequent vaginal yeast infections and/or urinary tract infections ( utis ) . if you have these symptoms , it 's important to see your healthcare provider . simple blood tests can diagnose t2 d. diagnosis : blood tests : fasting blood sugar , oral glucose tolerance test , and a1c test . symptoms and clinical signs : your doctor may consider your symptoms and overall health . management : lifestyle changes : healthy diet , regular exercise , weight management . medications : oral medications or insulin therapy may be prescribed . monitoring : regular blood sugar monitoring is important . complications : untreated or poorly managed type 2 diabetes can lead to serious complications such as heart disease , stroke , kidney damage , nerve damage , and vision problems . cardiovascular complications : increased risk of heart disease and stroke . hypertension often accompanies diabetes . microvascular complications : nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . retinopathy ( vision problems ) . foot complications : peripheral neuropathy increases the risk of foot ulcers and amputations . management : lifestyle modifications : healthy diet emphasizing whole foods , fruits , vegetables , and fiber . regular physical activity . weight management . medications : oral medications ( e.g. , metformin ) to improve insulin sensitivity . insulin therapy if oral medications are insufficient . blood sugar monitoring : regular monitoring to track blood glucose levels . education and support : diabetes education on self-care and management . emotional support for coping with the psychological aspects of diabetes . prevention : healthy lifestyle : adopting a healthy diet and regular exercise . maintaining a healthy weight . regular check-ups : regular health check-ups to monitor blood sugar levels , blood pressure , and cholesterol . public health implications : global impact : rising prevalence worldwide , associated with urbanization and lifestyle changes . healthcare costs : substantial economic burden due to healthcare costs and productivity loss . what is obesity ? obesity is a medical condition characterized by the accumulation of excessive body fat to the extent that it may have a negative impact on health . it is often defined by body mass index ( bmi ) , which is a person 's weight in kilograms divided by the square of their height in meters . a bmi of 30 or higher is generally considered indicative of obesity . 1. bmi categories : underweight : bmi less than 18.5 normal weight : bmi18.5 to 24.9 overweight : bmi25 to 29.9 obesity : bmi30 or higher 2. causes : caloric imbalance : obesity typically results from consuming more calories than the body uses , leading to the storage of excess energy as fat . genetics : genetic factors can influence an individual 's predisposition to obesity . environmental factors : factors such as unhealthy diets , sedentary lifestyles , and lack of access to nutritious foods can contribute . 3. health risks : obesity is associated with an increased risk of various health conditions , including : type 2 diabetes cardiovascular diseases ( heart disease and stroke ) certain types of cancer sleep apnea osteoarthritis respiratory problems mental health issues 4. prevention and management : adopting a healthy , balanced diet with appropriate portion sizes . engaging in regular physical activity . behavioral interventions and counseling . medical treatments and , in some cases , bariatric surgery for severe obesity . 5. global prevalence : obesity has become a global health concern , affecting people of all ages and socioeconomic backgrounds . the prevalence of obesity has risen significantly in recent decades . 6. stigma and discrimination : individuals with obesity may face societal stigma and discrimination , affecting their mental and emotional well-being . 7. childhood obesity : childhood obesity is a particular concern , as it can lead to health issues later in life . addressing obesity often requires a multifaceted approach , involving changes in diet , increased physical activity , behavioral modifications , and sometimes medical interventions . it 's essential to recognize obesity as a complex health issue with various contributing factors and to approach its prevention and management with a comprehensive and individualized strategy . what is high triglycerides ? triglycerides are a type of fat ( lipid ) found in your blood . when you eat , your body converts any calories it does n't need to use right away into triglycerides . these triglycerides are stored in fat cells for later use . while your body needs triglycerides for energy , having too high a level of triglycerides in your blood can be a risk factor for various health issues . normal triglyceride levels : normal : less than 150 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/d l ) borderline high : 150 to 199 mg/dl high : 200 to 499 mg/dl very high : 500 mg/d lor higher causes of high triglycerides : 1. unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated fats , trans fats , and refined carbohydrates can contribute to elevated triglyceride levels . 2. lack of physical activity : sedentary lifestyles and lack of regular exercise can lead to higher triglyceride levels . 3. obesity : being overweight or obese is often associated with higher triglyceride levels . 4. insulin resistance and diabetes : insulin resistance and diabetes can lead to increased triglycerides . 5. genetics : some people may have a genetic predisposition to higher triglyceride levels . 6. certain medical conditions : hypothyroidism , kidney disease , and liver disease can contribute to elevated triglycerides . 7. alcohol consumption : excessive alcohol intake can raise triglyceride levels . health risks associated with high triglycerides : 1. cardiovascular disease : high triglycerides , especially when combined with low levels of hdl cholesterol , can contribute to atherosclerosis ( hardening and narrowing of the arteries ) and increase the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2. pancreatitis : extremely high levels of triglycerides can lead to inflammation of the pancreas ( pancreatitis ) , a serious and potentially life-threatening condition . management of high triglycerides : 1. lifestyle changes : adopting a heart-healthy diet low in saturated and trans fats , and high in omega-3 fatty acids . regular physical activity . limiting alcohol intake . 2. medications : statins and other medications may be prescribed to lower triglyceride levels . 3. treatment of underlying conditions : managing underlying conditions such as diabetes or hypothyroidism . 4. regular monitoring : regular blood tests to monitor triglyceride levels . it 's important to note that managing triglyceride levels is often part of an overall strategy to maintain heart health . lifestyle modifications , including a healthy diet and regular exercise , are key components of preventing and managing high triglycerides . individuals with concerns about their triglyceride levels should consult with a healthcare professional for personalized advice and appropriate interventions . what is low hdl cholesterol ? Hdl cholesterol , or high-density lipoprotein cholesterol , is often referred to as `` good '' cholesterol . it plays a crucial role in the body by helping to remove other forms of cholesterol , specifically low-density lipoprotein ( ldl ) cholesterol ( often called `` bad '' cholesterol ) , from the bloodstream . hdl cholesterol carries cholesterol away from the arteries and back to the liver , where it can be processed and eliminated . this process helps prevent the buildup of plaque in the arteries . normal hdl cholesterol levels : desirable : 60 mg/dl and above borderline : 40 to 59 mg/dl poor : less than 40 mg/dl causes of low hdl cholesterol : 1.unhealthy lifestyle : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle can contribute to low hdl cholesterol levels . 2.unhealthy diet : diets high in saturated and trans fats can lower hdl cholesterol . 3. smoking : smoking is associated with lower hdl cholesterol levels . 4.genetics : genetic factors can influence cholesterol levels , including hdl cholesterol . 5. obesity : being overweight or obese can be associated with lower hdl cholesterol . 6.certain medical conditions : type 2 diabetes , metabolic syndrome , and some rare genetic disorders can affect hdlcholesterol levels . health implications of low hdl cholesterol : 1. increased cardiovascular risk : low hdl cholesterol is considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease . hdl cholesterol helps remove cholesterol from the arteries , and low levels may contribute to the buildup of plaque , increasing the risk of heart disease and stroke . 2.combination with high ldl cholesterol : having both low hdl cholesterol and high ldl cholesterol can significantly elevate cardiovascular risk . management of low hdl cholesterol : 1. lifestyle changes : regular physical activity , including aerobic exercise , can help raise hdl cholesterol . adopting a heart-healthy diet that includes sources of healthy fats , such as omega-3 fatty acids . 2. quit smoking : quitting smoking can have positive effects on hdl cholesterol levels . 3. weight management : losing weight , if necessary , can improve hdl cholesterol levels . 4. medications : in some cases , medications may be prescribed to raise hdl cholesterol , although lifestyle changes are usually the first approach . it 's important to note that cholesterol levels are just one aspect of cardiovascular health , and overall heart health involves a combination of factors , including blood pressure , blood sugar , and lifestyle habits . individuals concerned about their cholesterol levels should consult with a healthcare professional for a thorough evaluation and personalized advice on managing their cardiovascular risk . what is hyperglycemia ( high blood sugar ) ? hyperglycemia happens when there ’ s too much sugar ( glucose ) in your blood . It 's also called high blood sugar or high blood glucose . this happens when your body has too little insulin ( a hormone ) or if your body ca n't use insulin properly ( insulin resistance ) . hyperglycemia usually means you have diabetes , and people with diabetes can experience hyperglycemia episodes frequently . if you have hyperglycemia that 's untreated for long periods of time , it can damage your nerves , blood vessels , tissues and organs . evere hyperglycemia can also lead to an acute ( sudden and severe ) life-threatening complication called diabetes-related ketoacidosis ( dka ) , especially in people with diabetes who take insulin or people with undiagnosed type 1 diabetes . this requires immediate medical treatment . what is blood sugar ? glucose ( sugar ) mainly comes from carbohydrates in the food and drinks you consume . it 's your body 's main source of energy . your blood carries glucose to all of your body 's cells to use for energy . if you do n't have diabetes , several bodily processes naturally help keep your blood glucose in a healthy range . insulin , a hormone your pancreas makes , is the most significant contributor to maintaining healthy blood sugar . high blood sugar most often happens due to a lack of insulin or insulin resistance . this leads to diabetes . people who have diabetes must use medication , like oral diabetes medications or synthetic insulin , and/or lifestyle changes to help keep their blood sugar levels in range . current diabetes statistics in the philippines according to the international diabetes federation or idf , the prevalence rate of diabetes in filipino adults is approximately 6.3 % . that means that out of 63 million adults in our country , almost 4 million have diabetes . but , even with these high figures , there could be more undocumented diabetes cases in the philippines . after all , the idf didn ’ t include younger people in their data , and they didn ’ t take pre-diabetes into consideration . what ’ s even more alarming is that in a 2016 report , the world health organization announced that 6 % of all deaths in the philippines occurred due to diabetes . is type 2 diabetes genetic ? the cause of t2 dis complex , but researchers know that genetics play a strong role . your lifetime risk of developing t2 dis 40 % if you have one biological parent with t2d and 70 % if both of your biological parents have it . researchers have identified at least 150 dna variations linked to the risk of developing t2d some increase your risk and others decrease it . some of these variations may directly play a role in insulin resistance and insulin production . others may increase your risk of t2d by increasing your tendency to have overweight or obesity . these genetic variations likely act together with health and lifestyle factors to influence your overall risk of t2 d. what are the risk factors for type 2 diabetes ? you ’ re more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you : have a family history of type 2 diabetes ( biological parent or sibling ) . are older than 45. have overweight or obesity ( a bmi greater than 25 ) . are physically active less than three times a week . are black , hispanic , native american , asian american or pacific islander . had gestational diabetes while pregnant . have high blood pressure and/or high cholesterol . have prediabetes . have polycystic ovarian syndrome ( pcos ) . as t2d symptoms typically come on slowly , it ’ s important to see your primary care provider regularly if you 're at risk for the condition . this way , they can do screenings , like a basic metabolic panel ( bmp ) , to check on your blood sugar levels . it ’ s better to catch t2d earlier rather than later . diagnosis and tests how is type 2 diabetes diagnosed ? the following blood tests help your healthcare provider diagnose type 2 diabetes : fasting plasma glucose test : this lab test checks your blood sugar level . you typically need to get this test in the morning after an eight-hour fast ( nothing to eat or drink except water ) . a result of 126 mg/d lor higher means you have diabetes . random plasma glucose test : this lab test also checks your blood sugar , but you can get it at any time without fasting . a result of 200 mg/dl or higher means you have diabetes . a1c test : this lab test measures your average blood sugar levels over the past two to three months . a result of 6.5 % or higher means you have diabetes . in some cases , your provider may order an autoantibody blood test to see if you have type 1 diabetes instead of t2 d. management and treatment what is the treatment for type 2 diabetes ? unlike many health conditions , you mainly manage t2d on your own with medical guidance and support from your healthcare team . this could include your : primary care physician ( pcp ) or endocrinologist . registered dietitian . certified diabetes care and education specialist ( cdces ) . ophthalmologist ( eye doctor ) . dentist . your team should also include family members and other important people in your life . managing t2d can be challenging you have to make several decisions every day for it . but everything you do to improve your health is worth it . the core features of type 2 diabetes management include : lifestyle changes , like more exercise and eating adjustments . blood sugar monitoring . medication . exercise for type 2 diabetes regular activity is important for everyone . it 's even more important if you have diabetes . exercise is good for your health because it : lowers your blood sugar level without medication in the short term and long term . burns calories and may help with weight loss . improves blood flow and blood pressure . increases your energy level and boosts your mood . helps with stress management . talk to your provider before starting any exercise program . you may need to take special steps before , during and after physical activity , especially if you take insulin . the general goal is to get at least 150 minutes per week of moderate-intensity physical activity . type 2 diabetes diet ask your healthcare provider or registered dietitian to recommend a meal plan that ’ s right for you . what you eat , how much you eat , and when you eat are all important in keeping your blood sugar levels in the range that your healthcare team recommends . the key to eating with type 2 diabetes is to eat a variety of nutritious foods from all food groups , in the amounts your meal plan outlines . in general , these types of foods can help support healthy blood sugar levels : lean proteins , like chicken , eggs , fish and turkey . non-starchy vegetables , like broccoli , green beans , salad greens and cucumbers . healthy fats , like avocados , nuts , natural peanut butter and olive oil . complex carbohydrates , like beans , berries , sweet potatoes and whole-wheat bread . blood sugar monitoring monitoring your blood sugar is essential to finding out how well your current treatment plan is working . it gives you information on how to manage diabetes on a daily and sometimes even hourly basis . the results of blood sugar monitoring can help you make decisions about food , physical activity and dosing insulin . several things can affect your blood sugar . you can learn to predict some of these impacts with time and practice , while others are very difficult or impossible to predict . that ’ s why its important to check your blood sugar regularly if your healthcare provider recommends doing so . there are two main ways you can monitor your blood sugar at home if you have diabetes : with a glucose meter and finger stick . with a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) . you may choose either or both methods for a variety of reasons , such as : your access to the technology , which can vary due to cost and medical insurance coverage . how often your healthcare provider recommends checking your blood sugar . the medications you ’ re taking . your overall health . type 2 diabetes medications your healthcare provider may recommend taking medication , in addition to lifestyle changes , to manage type 2 diabetes . these include : oral diabetes medications : these are medications that you take by mouth to help manage blood sugar levels in people who have t2d but still produce some insulin . there are several types . the most commonly prescribed one is metformin . your provider may prescribe more than one oral diabetes medication at a time to achieve the best blood glucose management . glp-1 and dual glp-1/gipagonists : these are injectable medications that mainly help manage blood sugar levels in people with t2d . some glp-1 agonists can also help treat obesity . insulin : synthetic insulin directly lowers blood sugar levels . there are several types of insulin , like long-acting and short-acting types . you may inject it with syringes or pens , use inhaled insulin , or use an insulin pump . other medications : you may take other medications to manage coexisting conditions , like high blood pressure and high cholesterol . can type 2 diabetes be reversed ? type 2 diabetes is a chronic ( long-term ) disease , which means you must manage it for the rest of your life . there ’ s no cure for t2d . but you can manage it with lifestyle changes , medication and blood sugar monitoring in a way that keeps your blood sugar levels in a healthy range . if you stop managing it or undermanage it , your blood sugar levels will go back up . prevention can prevent type 2 diabetes ? certain strategies can help lower your risk of developing type 2 diabetes or delay its onset , including : exercising regularly ( at least 150 minutes a week ) . maintaining a weight that 's healthy for you . eating nutritious food . not smoking . unfortunately , some people have such strong genetic risk factors that even lifestyle changes are n't enough to prevent developing t2d . outlook / prognosis what is the outlook for type 2 diabetes ? if you have type 2 diabetes , your outlook depends on several factors , like : your age at diagnosis . how often and how well you ’ re able to keep your blood sugar levels in range . if you have other conditions , like high blood pressure or high cholesterol . your access to healthcare , diabetes management tools and medication , nutritious foods and support from loved ones . untreated or undermanaged t2d can lead to a range of health conditions . what are the complications of type 2 diabetes ? as your blood touches virtually every part of your body , having undermanaged type 2 diabetes that results in continuous high blood sugar over a long period of time can damage several areas of your body . potential complications of type 2 diabetes include : cardiovascular disease , including : coronary artery disease ( cad ) . peripheral artery disease ( pad ) . cerebrovascular disease . heart attack . stroke . eye conditions , including : diabetes-related retinopathy . diabetes-related macular edema . cataracts . glaucoma . blindness . additional complications include : diabetes-related nephropathy ( kidney disease ) . diabetes-related neuropathy ( nerve damage ) . skin conditions , like dry skin and bacterial and fungal infections . foot problems , including ulcers and infections that can lead to gangrene and possible amputation . gum disease and other oral health problems . hearing loss . digestive problems , including gastroparesis . sexual dysfunction . short-term complications of t2d hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state ( hhs ) is a life-threatening complication of type 2 diabetes . hhs happens when your blood sugar levels are too high for a long period , leading to severe dehydration and confusion . symptoms of hhs usually come on slowly and can take days or weeks to develop . symptoms include : very high blood sugar level ( over 600 mg/d l ) . mental changes , such as confusion , delirium or experiencing hallucinations . loss of consciousness . dry mouth and extreme thirst . frequent urination . blurred vision or loss of vision . weakness or paralysis that may be worse on one side of your body . hhs is life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment . if you experience these symptoms , call 911 or your local emergency services number . living with how do itake care of myself if i have type 2 diabetes ? type 2 diabetes is a complex condition that requires daily management , effort and planning . some tips that can help you manage t2d include : try to stick to healthy lifestyle changes : regular exercise and healthy eating plans are core parts of t2d management . set small goals and make one change at a time to prevent becoming overwhelmed . check your blood sugar regularly checking your blood sugar with a fingerstick and meter and/or using a continuous glucose monitor ( cgm ) is crucial to managing diabetes and preventing complications . follow your providers guidance for how often you should be checking it . take your medication regularly : follow your healthcare providers instructions for taking your medications ( if applicable ) . see your diabetes provider regularly : its important to see the provider who helps you manage t2d regularly to be sure that your management plan is working . don ’ t be afraid to ask them specific questions . see your other providers regularly , especially your eye doctor : type 2 diabetes can cause complications in various areas of your body , but especially your eyes . it ’ s important to see your eye doctor ( ophthalmologist ) at least yearly so that they can check the health of your eyes . have a sick day plan : talk with your diabetes provider about how to take care of yourself and manage t2d when you ’ re sick . illness can make it more difficult to manage blood sugar levels and can trigger hhs . stay educated : don ’ t be afraid to ask your provider questions about t2 d. the more you know about t2d and your management , the more likely you 'll be able to live healthily and prevent complications . find community : connecting with other people who have t2d whether in-person or online can help you feel less alone . take care of your mental health : people with diabetes are two to three times more likely to have depression and are 20 % more likely to be diagnosed with anxiety than those without diabetes . living with a chronic condition that requires constant care can be overwhelming . it 's important to talk to a mental health professional if you 're experiencing signs of depression and/or anxiety . when should i see my healthcare provider if i have type 2 diabetes ? you ’ ll need to have regular appointments with your healthcare team to be sure you 're on track with your t2d management plan . as your body , life and routines change , your management will need to , as well . your healthcare team can provide new strategies that are unique to your needs . if you develop symptoms of any diabetes complications , be sure to see your provider as soon as possible . a note from cleveland clinic type 2 diabetes involves constant day-to-day care and management . while it 'll likely be very overwhelming at first , over time you 'll get a better grasp on how to manage the condition and how to be in tune with your body.be sure to see your healthcare team regularly . managing type 2 diabetes involves a team effort you ’ ll want both medical professionals and friends and family on your side . don ’ t hesitate to reach out to them if you need help . type 2 diabetes is a condition that happens because of a problem in the way the body regulates and uses sugar as a fuel . that sugar also is called glucose . this long-term condition results in too much sugar circulating in the blood . eventually , high blood sugar levels can lead to disorders of the circulatory , nervous and immune systems . in type 2 diabetes , there are primarily two problems . the pancreas does not produce enough insulin a hormone that regulates the movement of sugar into the cells . and cells respond poorly to insulin and take in less sugar . type 2 diabetes used to be known as adult-onset diabetes , but both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can begin during childhood and adulthood . type 2 is more common in older adults . but the increase in the number of children with obesity has led to more cases of type 2 diabetes in younger people . there 's no cure for type 2 diabetes . losing weight , eating well and exercising can help manage the disease . if diet and exercise are n't enough to control blood sugar , diabetes medications or insulin therapy may be recommended . symptoms symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly . in fact , you can be living with type 2 diabetes for years and not know it . when symptoms are present , they may include : - increased thirst : experiencing a persistent feeling of thirst , often accompanied by a need to drink larger amounts of water than usual . - frequent urination : having to urinate more often than usual , which may include waking up frequently during the night to urinate . - increased hunger : feeling hungry more frequently or having an increased appetite , sometimes even after eating . - unintended weight loss : losing weight without actively trying to do so , which may be a result of the body not properly utilizing glucose for energy . - fatigue : persistent feelings of tiredness and lack of energy , even with adequate rest . - blurred vision : experiencing blurry or distorted vision , which can be a result of changes in the fluid levels within the eyes due to high blood sugar . - slow-healing sores : wounds and sores taking longer to heal than usual , which is linked to reduced circulation and compromised immune function . - slow healing of wounds : similar to slow-healing sores , individuals with diabetes may experience delays in the healing of cuts , bruises , or other injuries . - frequent infections : increased susceptibility to infections , such as urinary tract infections , skin infections , and others , due to compromised immune function . - numbness or tingling in the hands or feet : peripheral neuropathy , a condition where nerve damage can lead to sensations of numbness , tingling , or pain in the extremities . - areas of darkened skin , usually in the armpits and neck : acanthosis nigricans , a condition characterized by dark , thickened , and velvety skin in certain areas , often associated with insulin resistance . risk factors - insulin resistance : the primary factor in type 2 diabetes is insulin resistance . the body 's cells become resistant to the effects of insulin , a hormone that helps regulate blood sugar . as a result , the pancreas produces more insulin to compensate , but over time , it may not keep up with the increased demand . - genetics : there is a genetic predisposition to type 2 diabetes , and having a family history of the condition increases the risk . - lifestyle factors : 1. obesity : excess body weight , especially around the abdomen , is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 2. physical inactivity : lack of regular physical activity is associated with an increased risk . 3. unhealthy diet : diets high in refined sugars , saturated fats , and processed foods can contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . - age and ethnicity : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases with age , and certain ethnic groups , such as african americans , hispanics , native americans , and asian americans , are more prone to the condition . - obesity : obesity is a medical condition characterized by an excessive accumulation of body fat . it is often measured using the body mass index ( bmi ) , with obesity defined as a bmi of 30 or higher . obesity is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes , as excess body fat can lead to insulin resistance . - sedentary lifestyle : a sedentary lifestyle refers to a pattern of living that involves little or no physical activity or exercise . lack of regular physical activity is associated with various health risks , including an increased risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes . sedentary behavior may involve extended periods of sitting or low levels of physical movement . - family history : family history refers to the presence of a particular health condition , such as diabetes , among close biological relatives ( parents , siblings ) . having a family history of diabetes can increase an individual 's risk of developing the condition , suggesting a genetic predisposition . - age : age is a non-modifiable risk factor for type 2 diabetes . the risk of developing diabetes increases with age , particularly after the age of 45. this may be attributed to factors such as changes in metabolism , hormonal changes , and cumulative exposure to other risk factors over time . - ethnicity : ethnicity refers to the cultural and ancestral background of an individual . certain ethnic groups have a higher predisposition to type 2 diabetes . for example , african americans , hispanics , native americans , asian americans , and pacific islanders are at an increased risk compared to the general population . genetic factors and lifestyle patterns within specific ethnic communities contribute to these disparities . causes - genes : scientists have found different bits of dna that affect how your body makes insulin . - weight : having extra weight or obesity can cause insulin resistance . metabolic syndrome . people with insulin resistance often have a group of conditions including high blood sugar , high blood pressure , and high cholesterol and triglycerides . - too much glucose from your liver : when your blood sugar is low , your liver makes and sends out glucose . after you eat , your blood sugar goes up , and your liver usually slows down and stores its glucose for later . but some people 's livers do n't . they keep making sugar . - bad communication between cells : sometimes , cells send the wrong signals or do n't pick up messages correctly . when these problems affect how your cells make and use insulin or glucose , this can lead to diabetes . - broken beta cells : if the cells that make insulin send it out at the wrong time , your blood sugar gets thrown off . high blood sugar can damage these cells , too . medical history and health : - insulin resistance : insulin resistance is a condition where the body 's cells do not respond effectively to insulin , a hormone that regulates blood sugar . it can lead to elevated blood glucose levels and is a precursor to type 2 diabetes . - prediabetes : prediabetes is a condition where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be classified as diabetes . individuals with prediabetes have an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes . - heart and blood vessel disease : heart and blood vessel diseases encompass a range of conditions affecting the cardiovascular system , including coronary artery disease , heart failure , and stroke . diabetes is a significant risk factor for these diseases . - high blood pressure : high blood pressure ( hypertension ) is a condition where the force of blood against the artery walls is consistently too high . it is a common risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , and individuals with diabetes are at an increased risk . - low hdl ( `` good '' ) cholesterol : hdl cholesterol is often referred to as `` good '' cholesterol as it helps remove other forms of cholesterol from the bloodstream . low levels of hdl cholesterol are associated with an increased risk of heart disease . - high triglycerides : triglycerides are a type of fat found in the blood . high levels of triglycerides are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease , and they often accompany conditions like obesity and insulin resistance . - being overweight or having obesity : being overweight or having obesity is a condition where excess body fat accumulates , increasing the risk of developing type 2 diabetes , heart disease , and other health problems . - having a baby who weighed more than 9 pounds : giving birth to a baby weighing more than 9 pounds may be a risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes later in life . - gestational diabetes : gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy . women who have had gestational diabetes are at an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life . - polycystic ovary syndrome ( pcos ) : pcos is a hormonal disorder common among women of reproductive age . it is associated with insulin resistance and an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . - depression : depression is a mental health condition characterized by persistent feelings of sadness , loss of interest or pleasure , and other emotional and physical symptoms . it may be linked to an increased risk of developing diabetes . lifestyle factors : - getting little or no exercise : lack of physical activity and a sedentary lifestyle are significant risk factors for type 2 diabetes . regular exercise helps improve insulin sensitivity and manage weight . - smoking : smoking is a well-established risk factor for cardiovascular diseases , including heart disease . individuals who smoke and have diabetes face an increased risk of complications . - stress : chronic stress can contribute to unhealthy lifestyle habits , such as overeating or not getting enough exercise , which may increase the risk of developing diabetes . - sleeping too little or too much : disruptions in sleep patterns , whether due to insufficient sleep or excessive sleep , can affect metabolism and insulin sensitivity , potentially contributing to diabetes risk . type 2 diabetes diagnosis and tests diagnosing type 2 diabetes typically involves a combination of clinical evaluation and laboratory tests . here are the common methods and tests used for the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes : 1. symptoms and clinical evaluation : - symptoms : the presence of classic symptoms such as increased thirst , frequent urination , unexplained weight loss , fatigue , and others may prompt further investigation . - medical history : the healthcare provider will review the patient 's medical history , including family history of diabetes and other relevant factors . 2. fasting blood sugar test : - this test measures the blood glucose level after an overnight fast ( usually at least 8 hours without eating or drinking anything except water ) . - diagnostic criteria : a fasting blood sugar level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/d l ) or higher on two separate occasions generally indicates diabetes . 3. oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : -the ogttinvolves fasting overnight and then drinking a sugary solution . blood sugar levels are measured at intervals after consuming the solution . -diagnostic criteria : a blood sugar level of 200 mg/d lor higher two hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . 4. hemoglobin a1c test : - this test measures the average blood glucose level over the past two to three months by assessing the percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) . - diagnostic criteria : an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . 5. random blood sugar test : - this test measures blood glucose levels at any time of the day , regardless of when the individual last ate . - diagnostic criteria : a random blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher , along with diabetes symptoms , may indicate diabetes . 6. clinical guidelines and criteria : - world health organization ( who ) : the who also offers criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes , including fasting glucose levels and oral glucose tolerance tests . 7. blood tests : - a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) test : purpose : measures the average percentage of hemoglobin that is glycated ( bound to glucose ) over the past 2 or 3 months . procedure : a blood sample is taken , and the result is expressed as a percentage . an a1c level of 6.5 % or higher is generally used for the diagnosis of diabetes . -fasting plasma glucose test : purpose : measures blood sugar levels after an overnight fast . procedure : the individual refrains from eating or drinking ( except water ) for at least 8 hours before the test . A blood sample is taken , and a fasting glucose level of 126 milligrams per deciliter ( mg/dl ) or higher on two separate occasions may indicate diabetes . - oral glucose tolerance test ( ogtt ) : purpose : checks blood glucose levels before and 2 hours after consuming a sweetened beverage to evaluate how the body handles sugar . procedure : the individual drinks a sugary solution , and blood samples are taken before and after . a blood sugar level of 200 mg/dl or higher 2 hours after drinking the solution is indicative of diabetes . it 's important to note that the diagnostic criteria and methods may vary slightly between different organizations and regions . additionally , the diagnosis is not solely based on a single test result ; healthcare providers consider multiple factors , including the patient 's overall health , risk factors , and symptoms . individuals at risk for type 2 diabetes , such as those with a family history or certain lifestyle factors , may undergo regular screenings to detect the condition early . early detection and management are crucial for preventing complications associated with diabetes . a healthcare professional will determine the most appropriate diagnostic approach based on the individual 's circumstances . stages of type 2 diabetes 1. insulin resistance : description : in this initial stage , the body usually produces enough insulin to regulate blood sugar levels within the normal range . however , cells resist the effects of insulin , meaning they do n't use it efficiently . as a result , the body compensates by producing more insulin to aid glucose entry into the cells . characteristics : insulin resistance may be temporary , but it can persist over time . there is n't a specific test to directly measure insulin resistance , making it challenging to diagnose this stage directly . 2. prediabetes : description : insulin resistance , if not addressed , leads to an accumulation of glucose in the blood . prediabetes is the stage where blood sugar levels are higher than normal but not elevated enough to be classified as diabetes . during this stage , individuals may not experience noticeable symptoms . diagnostic criteria : an a1c ( glycated hemoglobin ) level between 5.7 % and 6.4 % is indicative of prediabetes . this blood test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months . implications of prediabetes : - individuals with prediabetes are at an increased risk for developing heart disease , stroke , and type 2 diabetes . - early intervention through lifestyle modifications , such as a healthy diet and regular physical activity , can help prevent the progression to type 2 diabetes . it 's important to note that these stages represent a continuum , and the progression to type 2 diabetes is not inevitable . lifestyle changes , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , can play a crucial role in preventing or delaying the onset of type 2 diabetes in individuals with insulin resistance or prediabetes . regular health check-ups and screenings are important for early detection and intervention . type 2 diabetes treatment the treatment of type 2 diabetes involves a comprehensive approach that includes lifestyle changes and , in some cases , medication . here are the key components of type 2 diabetes treatment : 1. lifestyle changes : - weight loss : objective : achieving and maintaining a healthy weight . benefits : weight loss can improve insulin sensitivity and help regulate blood sugar levels . recommendation : losing at least 7 % of body weight is considered beneficial . - healthy eating : objective : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet . guidance : work with a registered dietitian to learn about carbohydrates , create a meal plan , and focus on : eating fewer calories . reducing consumption of refined carbs , especially sweets . incorporating more vegetables and fruits into the diet . increasing fiber intake . - regular exercise : objective : engaging in regular physical activity . recommendation : aim for 30 to 60 minutes of exercise every day , which can include activities such as walking , biking , swimming , or other forms of aerobic exercise . strength training , like yoga or weightlifting , is also beneficial . note : check with your healthcare provider before starting a new exercise program , especially if you have other health concerns . - monitoring blood sugar levels : objective : regularly checking blood sugar levels to track the effectiveness of treatment . guidance : depending on your treatment plan , especially if you are on insulin , your doctor will provide instructions on how often to monitor blood sugar levels . - medication : purpose : medications may be prescribed to help manage blood sugar levels . - types of medications : - oral medications : these include various classes of drugs that help improve insulin sensitivity , reduce glucose production by the liver , and enhance glucose uptake by cells . - injectable medications : some people may require insulin injections or other injectable medications to control blood sugar . - regular medical check-ups : importance : regular visits to your healthcare provider are crucial to monitor overall health , adjust treatment plans as needed , and address any emerging issues . diabetes education : purpose : empower individuals with the knowledge and skills to manage their diabetes effectively . resources : diabetes education programs and support from healthcare professionals , including registered dietitians and diabetes educators . medication if lifestyle changes don ’ t get you to your target blood sugar levels , you may need medication . some of the most common for type 2 diabetes include : 1. metformin ( fortamet , glucophage , glumetza , riomet ) . this is usually the first medication used to treat type 2 diabetes . it lowers the amount of glucose your liver makes and helps your body respond better to the insulin it does make . 2. sulfonylureas . this group of drugs helps your body make more insulin . they include glimepiride ( amaryl ) , glipizide ( glucotrol ) , and glyburide ( dia beta , micronase ) . 3. meglitinides . they help your body make more insulin , and they work faster than sulfonylureas . you might take nateglinide ( starlix ) or repaglinide ( prandin ) . 4. thiazolidinediones . like metformin , they make you more sensitive to insulin . you could get pioglitazone ( actos ) or rosiglitazone ( avandia ) . but they also raise your risk of heart problems , so they are n't usually a first choice for treatment . 5. dpp-4 inhibitors . these medications -- linagliptin ( tradjenta ) , saxagliptin ( onglyza ) , and sitagliptin ( januvia ) -- help lower your blood sugar levels , but they can also cause joint pain and could inflame your pancreas . they work by blocking dpp-4 , which is an enzyme that affects the hormone incretin . 6. glp-1 receptor agonists . you take these medications with a needle to slow digestion and lower blood sugar levels . some of the most common ones are exenatide ( byetta , bydureon ) , liraglutide ( victoza ) , and semaglutide ( ozempic ) . 7. sglt2 inhibitors . these help your kidneys filter out more glucose . you might get bexagliflozin ( brenzavvy ) , canagliflozin ( invokana ) , dapagliflozin ( farxiga ) , or empagliflozin ( jardiance ) . empagliflozin has also proven effective in reducing the risk of hospitalization or death from heart failure . 8. gipand glp-1 receptor agonist . tirzepatide ( mounjaro ) is the first in its class and activates both the glp-1 and gipreceptors , which leads to improved blood sugar control . 9. insulin . you might take long-lasting shots at night , such as insulin detemir ( levemir ) or insulin glargine ( lantus ) . complications 1. cardiovascular diseases : description : high blood sugar levels over time can lead to damage in the heart and blood vessels , increasing the risk of cardiovascular diseases . specific risks : increased likelihood of heart disease or stroke . higher risk of blocked blood vessels ( atherosclerosis ) . elevated risk of chest pain ( angina ) . 2. nerve damage ( neuropathy ) : description : prolonged exposure to high blood sugar can cause damage to the nerves throughout the body . specific risks : digestive issues . impaired feeling in the feet . sexual response problems . 3. kidney disease : description : diabetes is a leading cause of kidney disease and can lead to kidney failure . specific risks : kidney damage requiring dialysis or transplantation . 4. eye problems ( retinopathy ) : description : high blood sugar can damage the tiny blood vessels in the eyes , leading to vision problems . specific risks : retinopathy , which can cause blindness if untreated . 5. foot problems and amputation risk : description : poor circulation and nerve damage can contribute to foot problems , increasing the risk of infections and , in severe cases , amputation . specific risks : slower wound healing . increased risk of infections . 6. other complications : pregnancy : increased risk of miscarriage , stillbirth , or birth defects in infants born to parents with diabetes . sleep apnea : individuals with diabetes may be more prone to developing sleep apnea , a condition characterized by interrupted breathing during sleep . hearing problems : higher likelihood of hearing problems , though the exact relationship is not clear . brain health : high blood sugar levels may contribute to brain damage and an increased risk of conditions such as alzheimer 's disease . depression : people with diabetes are twice as likely to experience depression compared to those without the condition . type 2 diabetes diet guidelines : 1. work with a dietitian : collaborate with a registered dietitian to create a personalized meal plan based on your specific needs , preferences , and health goals . 2. focus on whole foods : limit highly processed foods : reduce the consumption of highly processed foods , which often contain added sugars , unhealthy fats , and high levels of sodium . choose whole , unprocessed foods whenever possible . control carbohydrates : 3. reduce added sugars : minimize the intake of foods and beverages with added sugars , such as sugary drinks , candies , and desserts . choose complex carbohydrates : opt for whole grains , legumes , and high-fiber foods to help regulate blood sugar levels . replace low-fiber refined grains ( e.g. , white bread ) with whole grains ( e.g. , whole wheat bread , brown rice ) . 4. prioritize non-starchy vegetables : include in every meal : boost your intake of non-starchy vegetables like broccoli , leafy greens , peppers , and green beans . these vegetables are rich in fiber , vitamins , and minerals . 5. moderate portion sizes : portion control : be mindful of portion sizes to manage calorie intake and prevent overeating . use smaller plates to help control portions . 6. lean protein sources : choose lean proteins : include lean protein sources such as poultry , fish , tofu , legumes , and low-fat dairy in your diet . limit red and processed meats . 7. healthy fats : opt for healthy fats : choose sources of healthy fats , such as avocados , nuts , seeds , and olive oil . limit saturated and trans fats found in fried foods and processed snacks . 8. regular meal timing : establish consistent meal times : aim for regular meal timings to help regulate blood sugar levels . include snacks if needed , especially if taking medications that may cause low blood sugar . 9. stay hydrated : drink water : stay hydrated by drinking water throughout the day . limit sugary beverages and alcohol . 10. monitor blood sugar responses : test and analyze : regularly monitor blood sugar levels to understand how different foods impact your readings . adjust your diet based on your blood sugar responses . 11. individualized approach : personalize your plan : recognize that individual responses to foods can vary . tailor your diet to your specific needs and preferences . 12. regular review and adjustments : stay in touch with healthcare providers : regularly review your diet plan with healthcare providers and make adjustments as needed . managing type 2 diabetes managing your type 2 diabetes well helps you avoid complications and feel your best . along with a healthy diet , regular exercise , and medication as prescribed : 1. keep your blood pressure and cholesterol levels in the healthy range . high levels of either could raise your risk of diabetes complications . 2. get regular eye exams , dentist visits , and physicals . 3. check your feet daily for sores , redness , or swelling and let your doctor know if you notice any issues . 4. get at least 7 hours of good-quality sleep each night , as sleep loss interferes with blood sugar control . ask your doctor for help if you have a hard time sleeping . 5. be careful with alcohol . limit alcoholic drinks to 1-2 drinks a day , depending on your size and gender . if you do drink alcohol , check your blood sugar afterward . 6. work with your doctor to come up with a sick day plan . even a minor illness can interfere with your blood sugar and insulin levels . you may need to adjust your medications or check your blood sugar more often . type 2 diabetes prevention strategies : 1. weight management : - aim to lose 7 % to 10 % of your body weight if overweight . - weight loss in this range can significantly reduce the risk of developing type 2 diabetes . 2. regular physical activity : - engage in at least 30 minutes of brisk walking or moderate-intensity exercise most days of the week . - physical activity helps improve insulin sensitivity and overall metabolic health . 3. healthy eating habits : - avoid highly processed carbohydrates . - limit the consumption of sugary drinks . - reduce intake of trans and saturated fats . - limit red and processed meat consumption . - emphasize a balanced diet rich in fruits , vegetables , whole grains , lean proteins , and healthy fats . 4. smoking cessation : - quit smoking to reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes . - work with your doctor to manage weight gain that may occur after quitting . 5. regular monitoring of health : - keep track of key health indicators , including blood pressure , cholesterol levels , and body weight . - regular health check-ups and screenings can help detect and address risk factors early . 6. healthy diet : - adopt a well-balanced and nutritious diet that supports overall health . - work with a dietitian if needed to create a personalized meal plan . 7. regular exercise routine : - establish and maintain a regular exercise routine that includes both aerobic and strength-training exercises . - exercise is a powerful tool in preventing and managing diabetes . 8. weight management : - strive to maintain a healthy weight through a combination of a balanced diet and regular physical activity . - weight management is crucial for overall health and diabetes prevention . 9. monitoring blood sugar levels : - regularly monitor blood sugar levels , especially if you have risk factors for diabetes . - early detection and intervention are key in preventing the progression to type 2 diabetes . 10. medications ( if prescribed ) : - if prescribed by a healthcare provider , take medications as directed . - medications may be recommended for individuals at high risk of developing diabetes . preventing type 2 diabetes involves making consistent and sustainable lifestyle changes . these measures not only reduce the risk of diabetes but also contribute to overall well-being and long-term health . individuals with specific risk factors or a family history of diabetes should work closely with healthcare providers to develop a personalized prevention plan . monitoring : - blood glucose levels : regular monitoring of blood glucose levels is essential to track how different factors , such as diet and exercise , affect blood sugar . - a1c levels : the a1c test provides an average of blood glucose levels over the past 2-3 months , offering insight into long-term glucose control . - blood pressure : monitoring blood pressure is crucial , as individuals with diabetes have an increased risk of cardiovascular complications . - cholesterol levels : keeping cholesterol levels in check is important for cardiovascular health , especially given the higher risk in diabetes . treatment options : - oral medications : various classes of oral medications help manage blood sugar levels by improving insulin sensitivity , reducing glucose production , or aiding glucose uptake . - insulin therapy : some individuals may require insulin injections to regulate blood sugar effectively . lifestyle modifications : healthy habits , including a balanced diet , regular exercise , and weight management , are foundational to diabetes management . - bariatric surgery : in specific cases , bariatric surgery may be considered as a treatment option . nutrition : - carbohydrate counting : monitoring and managing carbohydrate intake is crucial for blood sugar control . - glycemic index : understanding the glycemic index of foods helps individuals make informed choices to prevent rapid spikes in blood sugar . - balanced meals : adopting a balanced and nutritious diet supports overall health and diabetes management . - portion control : managing portion sizes helps regulate calorie intake and maintain stable blood sugar levels . education and support : - diabetes education programs : these programs provide information and skills to individuals with diabetes for effective self-management . - support groups : connecting with others facing similar challenges can provide emotional support and practical insights . - lifestyle counseling : professional counseling helps individuals address behavioral aspects , set goals , and make sustainable lifestyle changes . medical professionals : 1. endocrinologist : specialization : endocrinologists are medical doctors who specialize in endocrinology , a field that focuses on the endocrine system and hormone-related disorders . diabetes falls under their expertise , as it involves the regulation of insulin , a key hormone . role in diabetes management : - diagnosis : endocrinologists often play a crucial role in diagnosing diabetes , especially when the condition is complex or difficult to manage . - treatment planning : they create comprehensive treatment plans tailored to the individual , considering factors like medication , insulin therapy , and lifestyle modifications . - management of complications : endocrinologists are equipped to address and manage complications associated with diabetes , such as cardiovascular issues , kidney problems , and nerve damage . 2. diabetes educator : specialization : diabetes educators are healthcare professionals with specialized training in diabetes care and education . they may include nurses , dietitians , pharmacists , or other healthcare providers . role in diabetes management : education : diabetes educators empower individuals with diabetes through education , covering topics such as blood sugar monitoring , medication management , and lifestyle modifications . support : they provide ongoing support , helping individuals navigate the challenges of daily diabetes management and offering practical solutions . behavioral counseling : diabetes educators often engage in behavioral counseling to assist individuals in adopting and sustaining healthy habits . 3. dietitian/nutritionist : specialization : dietitians or nutritionists are experts in food and nutrition , with specialized training in providing dietary guidance for various health conditions , including diabetes . role in diabetes management : - meal planning : dietitians help create personalized meal plans that align with diabetes management goals , considering factors like carbohydrate counting , glycemic index , and portion control . - nutritional counseling : they offer nutritional counseling to address individual dietary preferences , cultural considerations , and lifestyle factors . - weight management : dietitians play a crucial role in weight management , a key component of diabetes care . 4. primary care physician : - specialization : primary care physicians ( pcps ) are general practitioners who provide comprehensive healthcare and serve as the first point of contact for individuals seeking medical care . role in diabetes management : - initial diagnosis : pcps often diagnose type 2 diabetes during routine check-ups or in response to specific symptoms . - ongoing monitoring : they play a central role in the ongoing monitoring of diabetes and related health issues through regular check-ups . - coordination of care : pcps coordinate with specialists , such as endocrinologists and diabetes educators , to ensure a comprehensive and integrated approach to diabetes management . - medication management : pcps may prescribe and manage medications for diabetes , adjusting treatment plans as needed . blood glucose monitoring devices : 1. glucometer : description : a glucometer , also known as a blood glucose meter or blood sugar meter , is a portable , handheld device designed for self-monitoring of blood glucose levels . how it works : - individuals with diabetes use a lancet to prick their fingertip and obtain a small drop of blood . - this blood sample is then applied to a test strip inserted into the glucometer . - the glucometer analyzes the blood sample and provides a digital readout of the current blood glucose level . key features : - portability : glucometers are compact and easy to carry , allowing individuals to monitor their blood glucose levels conveniently at home or on the go . - rapid results : the results are typically available within seconds , enabling quick and timely adjustments to medication , diet , or activity . usage : - individuals often use glucometers multiple times a day to track variations in blood glucose levels . - regular monitoring helps in understanding how food , physical activity , and medications impact blood sugar . advantages : - cost-effective and widely accessible . - easy to use for routine monitoring . limitations : - provides a snapshot of blood glucose at a specific moment . - does not capture trends or variations between measurements . 2. continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) : description : continuous glucose monitoring ( cgm ) systems are advanced devices that offer real-time monitoring of glucose levels throughout the day and night . how it works : - a small sensor is inserted under the skin , usually on the abdomen . - the sensor continuously measures glucose levels in the interstitial fluid ( fluid between cells ) and transmits this data to a monitor or a smartphone . - the monitor displays real-time glucose levels and trends . key features : - continuous monitoring : cgm systems provide a continuous stream of data , offering a more comprehensive view of glucose fluctuations . - alerts and alarms : users can set customizable alerts for high and low glucose levels , enhancing proactive management . - trend analysis : cgm devices provide graphs and trend lines , helping individuals understand how their glucose levels change over time . usage : - cgm systems are typically worn for several days , up to two weeks , before requiring sensor replacement . - data can be downloaded and shared with healthcare providers for comprehensive analysis . advantages : - offers a more detailed and continuous picture of glucose dynamics . - provides insights into how lifestyle factors impact glucose trends . limitations : - higher cost compared to traditional glucometers . - requires sensor insertion beneath the skin , which may be uncomfortable for some individuals . genetic factors type 2 diabetes has a complex etiology , and both genetic and environmental factors contribute to its development . genetic factors play a significant role in determining an individual 's susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . here are some key aspects related to the genetic factors of type 2 diabetes : 1. family history : - inheritance : the risk of type 2 diabetes increases if there is a family history of the condition . individuals with a first-degree relative ( parent or sibling ) with type 2 diabetes are at a higher risk . - polygenic inheritance : multiple genes contribute to diabetes risk , and it often involves polygenic inheritance , meaning that several genes collectively influence susceptibility . 2. genetic variants and mutations : - common variants : there are common genetic variants associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes . these variants are often identified through genome-wide association studies ( gwas ) . - rare mutations : in some cases , rare mutations in specific genes can significantly increase the risk of diabetes . examples include mutations in the hnf1 a and hnf4 a genes . 3. insulin resistance and beta cell function : - genes influencing insulin sensitivity : genetic factors can impact insulin sensitivity , affecting how effectively cells respond to insulin . variations in genes like tcf7 l2 are associated with insulin resistance . - beta cell function genes : genes involved in the function of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas , such as those encoding for proinsulin processing , can influence diabetes risk . 4. epigenetic modifications : - environmental influence on gene expression : epigenetic modifications , such as dna methylation and histone modification , can influence how genes related to glucose metabolism are expressed . - lifestyle and environmental factors : environmental factors , including diet and lifestyle , can interact with genetic factors and contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes . 5. interaction with lifestyle factors : - gene-environment interaction : genetic factors interact with lifestyle and environmental factors , such as diet , physical activity , and obesity , influencing the overall risk of type 2 diabetes . - obesity-related genes : some genes are associated with an increased risk of obesity , which is a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes . 6. mitochondrial dna : - mitochondrial involvement : mitochondria , the energy-producing structures in cells , have their own dna . variations in mitochondrial dna have been studied in relation to type 2 diabetes . 7. ethnic and racial differences : - population-specific variations : there are ethnic and racial differences in the prevalence of certain genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes . different populations may have unique genetic risk profiles . 8. genetic testing : - risk prediction : genetic testing can provide information about an individual 's genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes . however , it 's important to note that genetic testing is only one aspect of overall risk assessment , and lifestyle factors also play a significant role . diabetes mellitus type 2. what is it ? diabetes is a common health problem in the u.s. and the world . in diabetes , the body does not use the food it digests well . it 1s hard for the body to use carbohydrates and fats . the main marker of diabetes is high blood sugar ( glucose ) . your blood sugar 1s kept in check by insulin . insulin is a hormone that is made in the pancreas . when you get diabetes , it is related to two things : the amount of insulin your body makes how well your bodys cells use insulin . there are two different types of diabetes : type and type 2. only about 5 of people have type 1. type 1 used to be called other names ( juvenile diabetes , insulin-dependent diabetes ) . in type 1 , the pancreas does not make insulin . it usually starts as a child or teen . type 2 often starts after age 40. type 2 used to be called other names too ( adult-onset diabetes ) . obese teens can also get type 2. in type 2 , your pancreas makes insulin . but , it does not make enough insulin . or , your body can not use the insulin as well . this often happens when you are obese . at first , your body will make more insulin to try to keep up . but , when the body can no longer keep up , diabetes comes on . type 2 often runs in families . symptoms symptoms of type 2 come from high blood sugar . they include : frequent urination , extreme thirst and hunger , weight loss , more likely to get skin and vaginal infections , infections or cuts that heal very slowly or not at all . diabetes education blood sugar that is not in control can lead to coma . there are two types of comas : the form that happens in type diabetes ( called ketoacidosis ) the form that happens in type 2 diabetes ( called hyperosmolar ) you may take insulin or pills to make your blood sugar go down . if your blood sugar drops too far you will get low blood sugar ( called hypoglycemia ) . low blood sugar has symptoms . they include : sweating trembling dizziness hunger confusion seizures loss of consciousness . blood sugar that stays high leads to long term problems from diabetes . you may not notice these problems for years . these are some : damage to the eyes ( called retinopathy ) can cause blindness . damage to the nerves ( called neuropathy ) can cause numbness , tingling and pain in your feet , legs , and arms . usually people feel it in the feet first . damage to the kidneys ( called nephropathy ) can cause your kidneys to stop working . you need your kidneys to get rid of waste products . you are also more likely to get heart disease . your heart has arteries that carry blood to the rest of your body . the trouble comes on when your arteries get narrow ( called atherosclerosis ) . then , blood does not flow well to parts of the body . this can happen 1n different parts of the body : heart , brain , legs . and , it leads to different problems : coronary heart disease ( heart ) cerebrovascular disease ( brain ) peripheral artery disease ( legs ) diabetes education symptoms include : chest pain heart attack heart failure stroke leg pain when you walk or exercise that feels better when you rest . you may have trouble getting blood to your legs and feet . this can cause foot ulcers and infections . the ulcers and infection can cause tissue to die ( called gangrene ) . this in turn may lead to amputation . what your doctor looks for your doctor will look for signs of diabetes . obesity , especially around the middle ( abdominal obesity ) . this is a waist that is more than 40 inches around in men or 35 inches around in women . high blood pressure signs of eye disease on eye examination decreased feeling and reflexes in the legs poor pulses in the feet blisters , ulcers or infections of the feet abnormal heart rhythm your doctor will also do lab tests . fasting blood sugar ( this tests your blood sugar before you have had anything to eat or drink . ) hemoglobin alc ( this test measures your average blood sugar level over the past 2 to 3 months . ) lipid profile ( this measures cholesterol , triglycerides , hdl and ldl cholesterol . it tells how likely it is that your arteries are narrowed . ) blood creatinine and urine microalbumin ( these tests look for signs of kidney disease . ) your doctor may also do an eye exam . heshe will look for early signs of eye disease . your doctor may also do a foot and ankle exam . heshe will diabetes education touch your foot with a small wire . this tests whether you can feel the wire on your feet and ankles . diagnosis your doctor will use your fasting blood tests to see if you have diabetes . your blood sugar should not be more than 126 mgdl on this test . you have diabetes if : your blood sugar is more than 126 , and you number stays high on more than one fasting test . expected duration there is no cure for diabetes . it lasts your whole life . type 2 can get much better in some obese people who lose weight and keep it off . prevention you can help prevent type 2 diabetes . you should keep your body weight within the normal range for your height . this is key if diabetes runs in your family . if you already have diabetes , its not too late . you can delay or stop later problems ( retinopathy , neuropathy , nephropathy ) . be sure to keep tight control of your blood sugar . there are ways to lower your risk of heart problems . you should not smoke . here are risk factors you can help control : high blood pressure high blood fats ( cholesterol and triglycerides ) obesity treatment and management in most people who have type 2 diabetes , treatment starts with weight . diet and exercise are used for weight loss . the diet is like ones used to lower bad fats and stop risk of heart disease . most people who have type 2 can control their blood sugar with pills at first . these include ones in the table . you may use pills for many years . but , over time , you may need insulin . or , you may need insulin right away . you should talk to your doctor about which medicine 1s right for you . metformin is suggested as the first one to try . diabetes education medicine class how it works sulfonylureas repaglinide ( prandin ) increases the amount of nateglinide ( starlix ) insulin released by your pancreas biguanide metformin lowers the amount of ( glucophage ) sugar produced by the liver , helps your body use insulin better thiazolidinediones rosiglitazone helps your body use ( avandia ) insulin better pioglitazone ( actos ) alpha-glucosidase acarbose ( precose ) delays the absorption inhibitors of sugars from the intestine the pills used to treat type 2 diabetes can have many side effects . see the table for the major ones . sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) weight gain metformin insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) thiazolidinedione insulin or low blood sugar sulfonylureas ( hypoglycemia ) metformin nausea and diarrhea ( less common if you take the medicine with a meal ) life threatening problems for people who already have liver or kidney disease diabetes education thiazolindinediones can affect your liver so you need to have routine blood tests extreme gas and bloating you should treat high bad cholesterol ( ldl ) . medicines that work to lower this are in the table . statins to lower ldl cholesterol lovastatin , pravastatin , simvastatin , fluvastatin , atorvastatin , rosuvastatin bile acid sequestrants to lower ldl cholestyramine ( questran ) , cholesterol colestipol ( colestid ) , colesevelam ( welchol ) new medicine to lower ldl cholesterol ezetimibe ( zetia ) medicines to lower triglycerides gemfibrozil , fenofibrate to control diabetes you should watch your diet , keep fit , and take your pills . if this is not enough , you may need to take insulin each day . you may also need to stick to a meal plan and eat meals at regular times . this will lessen your chances of having low blood sugar . test your blood sugar each day . this is a key part of managing your diabetes . this is true no matter which medicines you take . you will use a tiny needle ( called a lancet ) to get a small bit of blood . the fingertip is usually the place that is used . the testing meter will tell you how much sugar is in your blood . you should know the target ranges for your blood sugar . 90-120 mgdl before you have had anything to eat or drink 120-180 mgdl after meals if you know your blood sugar level you can choose types and amounts of food . you can also choose how to keep active . if your blood sugar is always diabetes education in the target range , you are not cured . it means that you are doing a good job of managing your diabetes . you will have a better chance at a good quality of life . it is less likely that you will have long term problems from diabetes . when to call your doctor with diabetes , you are at higher risk for loss of body fluids ( dehydration ) . call the doctor if you have nausea or vomiting that lasts . follow the testing schedule your doctor gives you for sick days . this should tell you how often to test : your blood sugar your urine for ketones . call your doctor right away if : you have blood sugars that are very high ( more than 400 500 mgdl ) . your doctor may want you to call before it gets that high . you have large amounts of ketones in your urine . have your family call the doctor right away if you show these signs : dehydration dry skin nausea vomiting confusion coma these are signs of severe high blood sugar problems ( ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar coma ) . prognosis type 2 diabetes can have a good outcome . there are things you must do to help . control your blood sugar . maintain a normal weight . reduce your risk factors for heart disease . diabetes education he incidence of type 2 diabetes ( t2d ) is on the rise in youth in the us and worldwide . t2d is character ized by hyperglycemia from a combination of insulin resistance and relative deficiency of insulin secretion . the contribution of insulin resistance to diabetes pathogenesis explains the clinical association of diabetes with obesity and , subsequently , the coincidence of increasing t2d prevalence with increasing prevalence and severity of obesity in children . differences have been described in the natural history of youth-onset t2d and adult-onset t2d . compared with adults , t2d in youth appears to progress more rapidly , with higher rates of metformin treatment failure and more rapid rates of beta cell decline . the presence of diabetes encumbers those affected with a long-term burden of chronic disease and an increased risk of cardiovascular and microvascular complications . this risk increases with the duration of the disease , putting children with t2d at extremely high risk for complications . follow-up data from both the search for diabetes in youth study and the treatment options for diabetes in youth ( today ) trial have found a substantial presence of diabetes complications as early as adolescence and young adulthood . moreover , the prevalence of complications and overall mortality are higher in youth with t2d compared with adults with t2d or even youth with type 1 diabetes . this burden of disease underscores the need to improve our understanding of diabetes risk , prevention , and optimal treatment in youth . t2d is a complex , multifactorial disease influenced by both environmental factors and genetic variation as well as their interactions . the heritability of t2d is demonstrated by both the high concordance rates in identical twins and the typical presence of a family history of t2d in those with the disease . investigations of the genetics of diabetes risk have examined both overall t2d risk as well as individual glycemic traits that may predispose to diabetes , such as fasting glucose levels , insulin secretion , insulin resistance , and 6-cell function . understanding the genetic underpinnings of diabetes risk offers an opportunity to improve both our knowledge of the mechanisms contributing to diabetes pathogenesis and our understanding of how best to individualize diabetes treatment and prevent compli grs genetic risk score gwas genome-wide association study mody maturity-onset diabetes of the young prodigy progress in diabetes genetics in youth t2d type 2 diabetes today treatment options for diabetes in youth cations . here we review the current state of t2d genetics , specifically as it pertains to children and adolescents . monogenic diabetes diabetes as a result of a single gene abnormality , or monogenic diabetes , shares clinical overlap with t2d , particularly t2d in youth . there are 3 major subgroups of monogenic diabetes : neonatal diabetes , syndromic diabetes , and maturity-onset diabetes of the young ( mody ) . neonatal diabetes presents in infancy , although only a subset of infants develops diabetes in the neonatal period ( the first 30 days of life ) the majority of patients become symptomatic within the first 6 months of life . syndromic diabetes presents with additional extrapancreatic features , typically also in infancy . mody is characterized by noninsulin-dependent diabetes diagnosed at a young age ( 25 years ) demonstrating an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern . subtypes of mody are based on specific genetic defects , with involvement of different genes associated with differences in clinical and physiologic phenotypes . monogenic diabetes can be caused by pathogenic mutations in genes that disrupt glucose sensing , insulin transcription , the potassiumadenosine triphosphate channel that transduces the signal for insulin release , the insulin gene , or pancreatic development . understanding the genes associated with monogenic forms of diabetes has provided insight into the disease mechanisms of diabetes . eleven different genes have been identified as causal for mody in the online mendelian inheritance in man catalog : hnf4a ( mody 1 ) , gck ( mody 2 ) , hnfia ( mody 3 ) , pdx1 ( mody 4 ) , hnfib ( mody 5 ) , neurodi ( mody 6 ) , cel ( mody 8 ) , ins ( mody 10 ) , abcc8 ( mody 12 ) , kcnj11 ( mody 13 ) , and appli ( mody 14 ) . note that the genes previously reported as causal for mody 7 , mody 9 , and mody 11 are absent from this list , owing to the recent proposal to eliminate them from the list of causal mody genes based on updated genetic evidence . mutations in the hnf4a and hnfia genes lead to abnormal insulin secretion , and mody caused by variants in these genes can be effectively managed with oral sulfonylurea therapy. ? mody caused by pathogenic variants in gck , the gene encoding glucokinase , which phosphorylates glucose to glucose-6-phosphate in pancreatic cells and acts as a glucose sensor , is characterized by a mild , stable hyperglycemia with a low risk of complications that commonly does not require any treatment . given the clinical overlap between t2d and rarer forms of diabetes , a long-held hypothesis is that the genetic underpinnings of both common and rare forms of diabetes might not be entirely distinct . multiple studies have shown that mody affects a small but not insignificant subset of youth with diabetes , including those clinically diagnosed with t2d . the search for diabetes in youth study published the first systematic study of mody prevalence in us youth , which reported a 1.2 overall prevalence of mody . a genetic sequencing study of participants in the today study found that 4.5 carried a pathogenic variant in a mody gene . a larger genetic study conducted by the progress in diabetes genetics in youth ( prodigy ) consortium that included the today cohort , a second cohort recruited by the today researchers for genetic studies , and a subset of the search for diabetes in youth study participants identified a 2.8 incidence of mody . these studies focused on rare , highly penetrant variants in known mody genes . in adult studies of t2d genetics , there is increasing overlap of common variant associations and genes associated with monogenic diabetes . although such associations have not yet been shown in youth with t2d , it is possible that further examination of rarer variants will find associations along a spectrum of disease risk in genes or pathways relevant to diabetes . candidate gene studies many efforts to understand the genetic underpinnings of t2d in children have focused on genetic variants with known associations with glycemic traits or t2d risk in adults , examining whether similar associations exist in youth . individual variants have been shown to have similar associations in children for both fasting glucose and the homeostasis model assessment of cell function . several t2d risk genes have been associated with youth-onset t2d , including tcf7l2 , slc16a11 , and abca1 . genetic risk scores ( grss ) , which allow for the assessment of the aggregate genetic risk of a given trait , have demonstrated association of grss constructed from variants associated in adults with glycemic traits andor t2d risk with fasting glucose and measures of -cell function , as well as measures of insulin resistance in youth . two studies have examined the ability of grss to identify children at risk of progressing to t2d even though the scores were shown to be associated with t2d risk , in one of the studies clinical factors such as body mass index ( bmi ) and family history of t2d had higher predictive utility . explosion of genetic discoveries related to adult t2d with extremely well-powered studies and advanced analytic techniques . at the time of this publication , 400 variants have been associated with t2d in adults . in comparison , large scale studies of pediatric t2d have not been conducted , largely due to limited sample sizes . to address this gap , we and colleagues formed the prodigy consortium , which is a collaboration of 3 research groups : the today study , search for diabetes in youth , and the type 2 diabetes genetic exploration by next-generation sequencing in multi-ethnic samples ( t2d-genes ) consortium . the prodigy study is a collaborative effort to increase understanding of the genetics of t2d in youth by combining the sample sizes and rich phenotypic data of 2 pediatric t2d studies with the genetic prowess and resources of a largescale adult diabetes genetics consortium . in prodigy , we conducted the first gwas for t2d in youth to identify genetic variants specifically predisposing to youth-onset t2d . we performed our genetic analysis in 3006 multiethnic youth with t2d who were autoantibody-negative for selected pancreatic autoantibodies and 6061 adult controls aged 50 years and diabetes-free . we identified 7 genome-wide significant loci , including the novel locus rs10992863 in phf2 with an or of 1.23 for t2d , implying that each copy of the g risk allele conferred a 23 greater odds of having t2d compared with the wildtype a allele . the remaining 6 loci were previously identified in adults and included tcf7l2 , mc4r , cdc123 , kcnqi1 , igfbp2 , and slc16a11 . at the outset of our prodigy collaboration , our hypothesis was that genetic effects were greater in youth with t2d compared with adults , given the extreme t2d phenotype with respect to early age of presentation . to explore this premise , we constructed grss in prodigy from known t2d variants identified in adults . our comparison of the association of the polygenic risk score between youth and adult cases and controls showed a significantly higher or for t2d in the youth analysis compared with the adult analysis , in accordance with our hypothesis . overall , the efforts of the prodigy consortium have provided initial insight into the genetic architecture of t2d in youth and have shown that the genetic architecture of t2d in youth largely overlaps with that in adults but with a greater aggregate genetic risk burden . functional studies of candidate genes are needed to understand how the identified genetic variants affect disease risk . studies evaluating the interplay between lifestyle and genetic factors are also needed to comprehensively evaluate t2d risk in youth . applications of genetics in youth-onset t2d there has been substantive growth in our understanding of the genetics of t2d in youth secondary to large-scale improvements in genotyping technology , next-generation sequencing techniques , and collaborative approaches such as prodigy to increase sample sizes . here we appraise the various applications of genetics as it pertains to pediatric t2d . srinivasan and todd august 2022 characterizing disease subtypes pediatric t2d is a heterogenous disease likely because of differing contributions from both environmental and genetic factors , as well as varying degrees of insulin resistance and 6cell dysfunction among individuals . the benefit of sulfonylureas in mody 3 is a concrete example of how genetics can be used to characterize disease and dictate treatment . although not always as targeted , genetics also can be used to characterize subtypes for the more common form of t2d . a soft clustering approach has been used to deconstruct the heterogeneity of t2d with groups of loci representing various mechanisms of disease based on 6 cell function , insulin resistance , and fat distribution ( figure ) . these efforts to categorize subtypes help to better characterize pathophysiology , with the hope of informing clinical management and the risk of complications in the future . the benefit of using genetic data to characterize disease is that it remains unchanged over an individuals lifetime and can be measured even before symptoms develop , a particularly valuable characteristic for high-risk children who often have very short latent periods before full-blown t2d develops . risk prediction current guidelines from the american diabetes association recommend screening youth with obesity for t2d based on the presence of certain additional risk factors , including a family history of t2d , high-risk raceethnicity , maternal history of gestational diabetes , and physical features associated with insulin resistance , such as acanthosis nigricans . although these criteria allow clinicians to readily identify youth requiring diabetes screening , it is not clear which of these youth will go on to develop t2d . in addition , there is no simple or direct correlation between clinical features as body mass index , fasting insulin level , or c-peptide level and the progression to t2d . in the early days of t2d gwas efforts , studies showed that a polygenic risk score for t2d in adults does not outperform clinical models of prediction , but when added to routine clinical risk factors , genetic information may enhance predictive utility , particularly for populations of younger adults in whom risk factors , such as glucose intolerance , might not have fully manifested . recently , a trans-ancestry polygenic risk score ( prs ) of 1259 754 hapmap3 variants and weights showed that the top 2 of the prs distribution can identify adults with a roughly 2.5- to 4.5-fold increase in t2d risk . using the top 2 of the prs as the classifier , the reported prevalence-adjusted positive predictive value was 0.26 and the negative predictive value was 0.90. although the current clinical utility of prss remains limited , in the future more sophisticated scores derived from diverse populations likely will continue to improve the predictive performance of these scores . for example , the intronic snp rs7903146 in tcf7l2 , which has one of the strongest known effect sizes for common variants in both youth and adults with t2d , ? has been localized to islet-selective open chromatin in 6 cells using a method called formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements sequencing . the highrisk t allele has been associated with increased transcription in islets and increased expression on cellular luciferase assays compared with the c allele , highlighting a mechanism by which this polymorphism may contribute to t2d risk . complementary approaches of studying diabetes and glycemic traits as well as regulatory and functional data can help improve our understanding of the underlying mechanisms contributing to t2d risk and progression . this is particularly important in youth , who have slightly different underlying pathogenic mechanisms compared with adults with t2d , such as 6 cell hyperresponsiveness in the early disease phase and a higher rate of cell decline . predicting response to interventions often in clinical medicine , patients do not respond or have adverse effects to medications that take time to uncover , leading to delays in optimal management , patient dissatisfaction , and wasted resources . genetics may help identify those patients who may benefit the most from a certain intervention , allowing us to stratify patients , which in turn could lead to better targeting of clinical or public health interventions . for example , the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention was effective even in the participants with the greatest genetic risk burden for established insulin resistance variants . in adults , there has been extensive work evaluating the genetic determinants of metformin response , given the significant interindividual variability in metformin response and evidence of significant heritability , with gwass so far identifying 5 variants associated with metformin response . similarly , sulfonylureas are metabolized predominantly by cytochrome p450 2c9 ( cyp2c9 ) , and loss-of-function alleles in cyp2cp have been associated with a greater response to sulfonylureas . there have been no pharmacogenetic studies of t2d in youth reported to date , and this is an area where additional research is needed . for example , 50 of youth on metformin therapy do not have sustained glycemic control , a greater proportion than seen in adults . the mechanisms behind this difference is unclear , and identifying genetic variants associated with metformin response in youth potentially could help elucidate the reasons for treatment failure . conclusions given the exponential rise in the incidence of t2d in youth , the ageressive nature of the disease compared with adults , and the significant heritability of the disease , it is critical that we strive to better understand the genetic basis of t2d in youth . although studies of pediatric t2d genetics have lagged behind adult studies largely because of the difficulty conducting studies with large sample sizes , technological advances and collaborative efforts have helped moved the field forward . however , much remains to be discovered , and further largescale efforts with computational and functional follow-up of findings are needed to continue to advance our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of t2d in youth . the knowledge of genetics can be used to better understand the pathophysiology of the disease in youth , characterize subtypes , assist with disease prediction , and aid the targeting of pharmacologic interventions with the ultimate goal of developing a personalized medicine approach to tackle youth-onset t2d .