the risk factors of diabetes can be grouped into 2 1. those that cannot be modified a. advancing age b. family history of diabetes 2. those that are modifiable a. overweight and obesity b. alcohol use c. tobacco use d. physical inactivity e. a stressful lifestyle f. unhealthy diet diagnosis diagnosis of diabetes in the majority of people presenting with the classical symptoms of diabetes, the diagnosis is straightforward. a fasting blood sugar level of more than 7m mol/l is diagnostic (fasting means a person has not eaten overnight or for the last 8 hour) a random blood sugar of more than 11.1mmol/l is diagnostic of diabetes. (a random blood sugar of between 7.1m mol/l and 11.1m mol/l refer to hospital to confirm diagnosis). the goal of diabetes management is to improve the quality of life and productivity of people living with diabetes. there are two modalities of managing diabetes. (diabetes education goes hand in hand with these two methods). non drug method (use of proper diet and physical activity). use of drugs e.g. diabetes tablets for lowering blood sugar and insulin 1. education community members including people living with diabetes need to know: that diabetes is a serious lifelong disease that has no cure, but can be controlled. the pillars of management include: knowing what foods to eat, how much and how often to eat, knowing the importance and precautions of exercise, how and when to take diabetes medications that community should know and be encouraged to seek regular medical checkups which is essential for early detection of the disease people with diabetes need to know how to identify diabetes related emergencies arising from low or high blood sugar levels and when to seek medical help. pregnant mothers to be encouraged to check their blood sugars regularly. complications of diabetes are preventable. good blood sugar control is essential to prevent long term complications of diabetes. that people with diabetes have to look after their feet to prevent injuries and thus prevent ulcers and amputations. eating a healthy diet and increasing the level of physical activity should be the first steps in the management of newly diagnosed people with diabetes, and have to be maintained. good dietary practices in the management of diabetes mellitus appropriate diet and physical activity is important in maintaining an ideal body weight. reduced intake of animal fat, salt, and refined foods is recommended. locally available foods high in fiber, vegetables and fruits should be encouraged in the community the nutritionist or a trained diabetes educator can help you know the appropriate food portion sizes to meet your dietary requirement. eat a variety of foods in at-least three meals a day. alcohol and tobacco products use should be avoided. water is essential for normal body functioning. at-least eight glasses of water should be taken per day. physical activity regular physical activity helps in; increasing insulin sensitivity thus improving blood sugar control, controlling blood pressure, improving blood flow in the heart and vessels, weight loss and maintenance of healthy body weight, giving one a sense of well-being. physical activity should be regular (3 days/week), lasting at least 20-30 min. per session, and be of at least moderate intensity. examples of physical activities you can involve yourself include; housework, gardening, walking, climbing stairs. examples of exercises you can involve yourself include fast walking, cycling, jogging, playing games, weightlifting, rope jumping, swimming, indoor exercises e.g sit ups and press ups. activities like walking, climbing steps (instead of taking lifts) should be encouraged. people with diabetes require proper medical assessment before engaging in vigorous physical activity proper shoes must always be worn during exercises to avoid injury to the feet. diabetes is managed by use of medicines that can either be: oral blood sugar lowering tablets, insulin injection it is important to note that; oral tablets are used when an individuals blood sugar control is not achieved using the combination of dietary modifications and physical activity/exercise. patients currently using tablets to control their blood sugar may at one time in the future need insulin as these tablets may no longer work in them. in some cases, oral tablets or insulin injection may be given at the time of diagnosis of diabetes if the blood sugar is extremely high. i.e. a fasting blood glucose level more than 11 mmol/lor random blood glucose level more than 15 mmol/l. individuals with type 1 diabetes must be on insulin for survival. principles of insulin administration the injection sites most commonly used for insulin are the abdomen, the thigh, and the outer upper arm. the rate of absorption is fastest on the abdomen. the thigh should be avoided as an injection site when exercise is going to be done, as this will increase the rate of absorption of the insulin. one area should be used for an injection at a particular time of day, e.g. the abdomen is the site for the morning injection, and the thigh is the site for the evening injection. within these areas, the injection site is to be rotated. to avoid formation of a hard scar (seen as a lump) injection on these scars should be avoided as insulin absorption is not predictable the injection should be done at a 90-degree angle with the skin using the recommended insulin administration syringe and needle. the needle should be held in place for 10 seconds after injection before withdrawal. early diagnosis of diabetes, good management and regular screening for complications can do much to reduce the burden that complications can impose on people living with diabetes and the health care system. diabetes complications are divided into two broad groups 1. short term complications 2. long term complications short term complications hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) occurs when the blood sugar is too low; less than 3.5mmols/l it requires immediate treatment. causes: skipping or delaying meals, wrong timings of medication, eating inadequate meal portions,  drug overdose, side effect of medication, unplanned and excessive, alcohol intake physical activity signs and symptoms: dizziness, confusion, weakness, reduced concentration, cold, sweaty skin, nervousness, profuse sweating, fast heartbeat,  hunger,  headache, irritability, numbness of tongue and mouth, bad dreams, fainting and loss of consciousness. prevention and treatment of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when the signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia are noted, eat or drink a fast acting sugar e.g 3 teaspoons of sugar or honey (can be dissolved in water), 3 sweets, 3 biscuits or 3/4 cup of juice or soda. then eat a meal. in case of unconscious person do not give fluids or food. instead apply moistened sugar or honey on the inner cheek lining (not on the tongue) if symptoms persist or recur refer to the hospital. prevention of hypoglycemia avoid skipping or delaying meals eat adequate food portions use medications as prescribed (dosage and timing) avoid alcohol use avoid unplanned and excessive physical activity note: the patient should always carry some sugar source(e.g. 3 sweets, 3 biscuits or a light meal) the patient should always carry or wear an identification tag/bracelet/card stating that they have diabetes. a note on hyperglycemia (high blood sugar) in case the blood sugar remains persistently high despite following the healthcare workers instructions on medication, please refer the patient urgently to see the nearest health facility. prevention and management long term complications of diabetes poorly controlled blood sugar can lead to long term complications of diabetes. long term complications arise due to damage of the blood vessels resulting in;1. diseases of the large blood vessels (affects the brain and heart) 2. diseases of the small blood vessels and nerves (affects the eyes, kidneys, sexual organs and feet) diabetes and the brain a person with diabetes is at higher risk for stroke than the general population. persistently elevated blood sugar levels contribute to the buildup of deposits in blood vessels thus leading to impaired blood flow or complete blockage and subsequently stroke. diabetes and the eye uncontrolled diabetes damages the small blood vessels at the back of the eye that enables one to see leading to poor vision and eventually to blindness. people with poorly controlled diabetes develops cataract at an earlier age than others. diabetes and the heart high blood sugar levels over time can lead to deposits causing the narrowing and the hardening of blood vessels that supply oxygen to the heart. therefore flow of blood to the heart can slow down or stop causing a heart attack. heart disease is the leading cause of death for people with diabetes. diabetes and the kidney high blood sugar can overwork the kidneys causing them to stop working properly and cause them to leak protein in the urine leading to kidney failure in the long run. diabetes and the sexual function poorly controlled diabetes damages nerves and blood vessels which are important for functioning of sexual organs. in women it may cause reduced urge to sex and painful intercourse. in men, it may cause impotence and erectile dysfunction. this increases with age and has a major psychological impact. uncontrolled diabetes can lead to nerve damage or poor blood supply to the feet and can lead to wounds on the feet which can get infected which if untreated can lead to amputation (cutting of the leg). the dos of diabetes foot management 1. wash your feet regulary and dry between the toes 2. cut nails straight with a nail cutter and file the sharp edges 3. examine your feet daily, using a mirror or use an assistant 4. seek medical attention for bruises, cuts or blisters 5. examine your shoes daily for any foreign objects 6. moisturize your feet using creams or lotions (avoid petroleum based jelly) 7. test bathing water with your elbow before washing your feet to avoid burns 8. wear loose absorbent socks 9. shoes should be: closed and well-fitting fastened with laces or velcro wide enough to accommodate the toe bought in the afternoon as feet tend to swell towards the evening the don’ts of diabetes foot management 1. avoid walking bare foot 2. avoid smoking as it can harm blood circulation in your feet 3. avoid touching hot surfaces 4. avoid shoes with high heels and pointed toes. 5. avoid open shoes or sandals 6. avoid warming your feet in front of open fire 7. avoid wearing tight shoes without proper support and eat healthy foods: more vegetables and fruits, less carbohydrates, fats, sugars and salts; exercise regularly: at least 30 minutes of brisk walking every day will do you good. take the stairs not the lift. walk short distances; dont board a vehicle encourage children to have daily physical exercises. avoid smoking, if a smoker seeks assistance to quit smoking; avoid harmful use of alcohol: excessive use of alcohol is dangerous to health; its good to know you are healthy; visit your nearest health facility for checkups for diabetes and blood pressure. early diagnosis and proper treatment prevents complications of diabetes; dontwait until you are feeling unwell; check your body mass index (bmi): this is the ration of weight in kg/height in meters 2 for example: if your weight is 75kg and height is 154cm bmi=75/(1.54) 2 =75/2.3716=31.6 less than 18.5 underweight 18.5-24.9 normal 25-29.9 overweight 30+ above obese. myths and misconceptions about diabetes the following are some of the misconceptions and myths regarding diabetes in kenya; myth: diabetes is a disease of the rich fact: diabetes knows no boundaries and affects all the people across the board. myth: diabetes is the result of eating too much sugar fact: diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body. however, taking too much sugar may lead to obesity and overweight that are risk factors for developing diabetes. myth: only older people get diabetes fact: diabetes knows no boundaries and affects all the people across the board. despite older people being at a higher risk of developing diabetes, younger people also need to take precaution. myth: diabetes gets cured after a while fact: diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body. the damaged cells cannot be brought back to life. once an individual develops diabetes, he/she shall need lifelong treatment that ranges from diet, exercises and or with drugs. myth: if you look fat/obese you are healthy despite having diabetes fact: obesity/overweight is a predisposing factor for diabetes. to avoid developing diabetes, you should maintain a healthy weight. myth: diabetes is the result of a curses/witchcraft fact: diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body. myth: diabetes is cured through prayers since it is brought on by evil spirits fact: diabetes is as a result of lack of insulin that is essential for the control of blood sugar in the body. spiritual support enhances good control of blood sugar. myth: traditional healers can cure diabetes using nutritional and herbal supplements fact: diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body. diabetes has no cure and can only be controlled by a combination of diet, exercises or drugs. myth: alternative therapy preferred over scientific therapy. fact: diabetes results from gradual damage to the cells producing insulin in the body. diabetes has no cure and can only be controlled by a combination of diet, exercises or drugs. myth: having diabetes means eating different foods from others. fact: people with diabetes don’t need to follow a restricted diet but instead should follow the same healthy eating guidelines as every person in the community which can be provided by a nutritionist in your local health facility. wagner et al. reported that increased pancreatic steatosis interacted with decreased insulin secretion. interestingly, wagner et al. performed sensitivity analyses across the 5 clusters of t2 addened by udler et al. and found that the interaction was driven by a pprs dening the liver metabolism/nafld gene cluster. finally, recent work using a pprs for lipodystrophy found that despite having lower bmi/waist circumference, those with a higher lipodystrophy pprs had significantly higher insulin resistance and low-density lipoprotein, portending possible increased cvd risk in this specific subpopulation. further work will be needed to elucidate the relationship between pprs and risk prediction/stratification in the clinical context. genetics and the potential for tailored therapy in t2d. examples from published reports that exemplify different physiological/molecular mechanisms and showcase how researchers move from gwas signal to a molecular mechanism. werst highlight colocalization: a method through which investigators can ne-map hundreds-to- thousands of gwas signals in a genetic region to the likely causal variant. colocalization can identify causal variants/genes, prioritizing translation. A powerful way to identify effector transcripts at gwas loci is to identify colocalization of association signals for disease risk and gene expression. colocalization of genetic signals is generally performed using summary-level statistics from gwas for disease (eg, t2d) and gwas for expression quantitative trait loci (eqtl) data, though any other type of genome- wide study data could also be used in colocalization methods (ie, dna methylation data, histone methylation data, and so on). eqtl data rejects genome-wide variant associations with individual gene expression levels within a specific is supercell type (eg, pancreatic islet). eqtls can be detected in multiple tissues; however, working with disease-relevant tissues is the preferred approach, because eqtls are frequently tissue-specific. many genes are highly dependent on context-specificity, with their expression levels dependent on a combination of cell type, environmental perturbation (eg, starvation vs hyperglycemia), and/or epigenome structure. in particular, epigenetics has become a focus in the last decade with mounting evidence that aging and dis- ease alter the physical structure of dna, potentially limiting gene expression even in cases where the context speci city is otherwise met. in this context, methods such as chromatin segregation to highlight the active and repressed regions of dna represent promising avenues through which to integrate many data sources and identify effector transcripts. identifying colocalization of a t2d gwas signal and an eqtl in a diabetes-relevant tissue, such as pancreatic islets, offers evidence for a potential causal link (and thereby identities the effector transcript). in this causal relationship, the genetic variant influences pancreatic islet gene expression, which in turn affects t2d risk. in addition to the gtex database, recent publications of eqtl data for skeletal muscle, adipose, and pancreatic islet tissue have contributed to deciphering possible mechanistic links for t2d gwas variants. Examples of translation of t2d gwas signals into understanding of molecular mechanism/pathogenesis. the early identification of 2 independent coding variant signals in the pam gene for t2d risk provided a molecular signpost to the effector transcript (ie, strongly implicating pam as the causal gene), accelerating efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms of pam. further work highlighted the association of pam with both t2d and beta-cell function. thomsen et al. reported that both coding alleles in the pam protein result in a loss of function, reducing the ability of this a misdating enzyme to increase the biological potency of glycine-extended neuropeptides. loss of pam in a human beta-cell model resulted in reduced insulin content and secretion, an effect also observed in isolated primary islets from carriers of the pam t2d-risk allele. even when the effector transcript and the tissue of effect are known, there can still be challenges. the slc30 a8 locus provides an example of the complexity. early gwas for t2d identified a nonsynonymous coding allele in slc30 a8 associated with t2d risk; however, whether t2d risk was associated with loss vs gain-of-function in the gene was unclear from early functional and rodent studies, but human genetic evidence provided compelling support that loss-of-function in slc30 a8 was associated with diabetes protection. a recent study, combining detailed physiological characterization in human carrier soft the slc30 a8 loss-of- function variants coupled with cellular studies in a suite of human beta-cell models, demonstrated that the slc30 a8 t2 d-protective alleles cause enhanced insulin secretion. tm6 sf2 was rst identified as a missense variant (hence identifying tm6 sf2 as the likely effector transcript) that caused low low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (ldl-c) but paradoxically increased nafld risk. several groups found that tm6 sf2 was primarily expressed by the liver, and congruent work by smagris et al. and mahdessian et al. found that the likely mechanism of action for tm6 sf2 was through impaired very-low density lipoprotein release from the liver, leading to nafld via fat accumulation but also lower ldl-cin serum. subsequent work supports this proposed mechanism and has found that tm6 sf2 is associated with incident t2d, and in g that is supported by large- scale gwas that later identified tm6 sf2 as a t2d risk locus.a locus containing fto has long been associated with obesity, and fto knockout in mice reduces bmi. however, recent evidence suggests that fto is not the causal gene at this locus. the t2d risk allele in the locus increased both irx3 and irx5 gene expression. adding further weight to these convincing human studies, irx3 knockout mice recapitulated the prior fto knockout phenotype: they had substantially reduced body weight and increased brown adipose tissue, suggesting that irx3, rather than fto, is the causal gene causing obesity and increased t2d/cvd risk. the example of fto/ irx3 illustrates the complexity in untangling the molecular mechanism of t2d gwas variants that are regulatory in nature, and highlights the importance of context (correct tissue, at the right developmental time point, and with appropriate environmental conditions). mr is a powerful technique that leverages the random assortment of alleles during meiosis to assess potential causality between snv genotype and outcomes. an adverse drug reaction (adr) is also identified via an association with bacterial sepsis, warranting caution in prescribing inhibitor. 2 nonsense mutations in pcsk9 that resulted in drastically lower ldl-c, spurring drug development of pcsk9 inhibitors. a subsequent mr study demonstrated that loss-of-function variants in pcsk9 were associated with decreased ldl-c and cvd, suggesting a causal pathway. concurrent to this mr study, pcsk9 inhibition was found to reduce both ldl-cand cvd events. Mr can also be done at large-scale, allowing for rapid screening of multiple candidates for potential drug development. for example, folkersen et al. recently reported on genetic variants in sequencing 90 serum protein levels (a protein quantitative trait loci pqtl study) and performed an mr study that implicated a causal role for rage protein in t2d, whereby a ger(the gene encoding rage) snvs caused higher rageprotein levels and subsequent lower t2d risk. of note, their mr analysis did not need evidence of an association with alzheimers disease , for which a rage inhibitor had previously been studied. this study, in conjunction with prior work on pcsk9 inhibition, demonstrates the utility of mr in identifying novel drug targets and validating drugs under development. although classically described for snv alleles, mr can also be used to assess if a given pprs is causally associated with an outcome via an intermediate phenotype. for example, sanna et al. used a pprs for propionate, a fecal short-chain fatty acid, and found that the pprs was associated with both increased propionate levels and increased t2d risk. these results suggested that genetically controlled propionate levels were causally linked with differential t2d risk.similarly, sinnott-armstrong et al. leveraged deep phenotyping with protein and urine biomarkers to demonstrate causal relationships across many traits and diseases, including highlighting an emerging causal role for decreased ldl-c and increased t2d risk. phenome-wide association studies to identify potential non-label use for existing drugs. anal genetic tool that has broad relevance in drug repurposing and identification of potential adverse reactions is the phenome-wide association study (phewas). a  phewas inverts the study design of a gwas: a single snv is tested for association with multiple phenotypes, most commonly through the use of international classification of disease-10th revision codes in emr data. through such large-scale snv-disease associations, investigators can identify off -target effects (otes) that may represent targets for drug repurposing and also potential adverse drug reactions. however, after identification of an ote, further investigation must central illustration disentangling t2d pathogenic mechanisms, leading to precision medicine. partitioned polygenic risk scores (pprs) can identify the intermediate phenotypes that are driving t2d pathogenesis in a specific patient. with further research (preferably with randomization concurrent with clinical implementation), we aim to develop an evidence base similar to that with monogenic diabetes s that tailors prevention/treatment strategies based upon a specific patient s genetics and pprs-identified pathologic pathways. b-cell pancreatic beta cell be undertaken to ensure that the direction of effect for the snv-disease association is consistent with beneficence. for example, although tm6 sf2 is associated with decreased ldl-c and cvd, it is concomitantly associated with increased nafld. as an example of phe was, cai et al. recently analyzed an il6 rsnv and found a significant association with abdominal aortic aneurysm, representing a possible ote. tocilizumab, an il-6 r antagonist, has since been approved for use in giant cell arteritis, of which a significant complication is aortic aneurysm. moreover, cai et al. found that decreased il-6 r levels were associated with increased risk of adverse drug reactions, eczema, conjunctivitis, and pleuritis, consistent with trial data for tocilizumab. these results offer a glimpse into the power of phewas for drug discovery and repurposing in t2d, as well as in identifying the likely side-effect profile of a given agent. Future directions for research into the genetics of t2d precision medicine for t2d using gprs/pprs. gprs can be used to risk-stratify patients, enabling earlier interventions and prevention of t2d patho-genesis and complications. we envision that gprs can be used to identify asymptomatic patients who are at high risk of developing t2d based on their non modifiable genetic risk. clinicians can then intervene with intensive lifestyle modification, medications (eg, metformin), and/or counseling to prevent onset and progression of t2d. gprs-based risk stratification can also be implemented in conjunction with clinical covariates, as recently demonstrated by wagner et al., as simple clinical covariates are excellent predictors of t2d-related complications. as we move toward more precise measurements and targeting of pathways, pprs for intermediate phenotypes has the potential to further renew our dignostics and therapeutics with regard to complex diseases like t2d. already, pprs methods have high-lighted unknown or unappreciated pathways (such as nafld or lipodystrophy) leading to t2d. although in the seminal work by udler et al. only 30% of patients segregated to the highest decile of genetic risk for a given pprs, we suspect that this proportion will increase with larger/improved gwas particularly in non-european populations. more clinically relevant is the question of how pprs will change management of t2d: although we infer that t2d caused by lipodystrophy-like vs beta-cell failure processes can likely be optimally managed with different combinations of medications/lifestyle interventions, there is yet a paucity of evidence to support these hypotheses. hence, moving forward with gprs/ pprs in clinical settings, we strongly advocate for randomized studies to evaluate the effect of these genetic risk tools in clinical decision making and outcomes, simultaneous to its implementation. with such an evidence base available, we are hopeful that the treatment of t2d can mirror that of monogenic diabetes, whereby specific therapies are tailored to genotype. limited studies in non-european ancestry populations. perhaps the greatest limitation of research into the genomics of t2d and cvd is that the vast majority of studies have been performed in european-ancestry populations. recently, several high-profile gwas and other genetic studies for t2d have been performed for asian-ancestry and african-ancestry individuals. further gwas/genetic studies in non-european-ancestry populations are of crucial importance, as they serve as the input data for gprs/pprs, which in turn have the potential to identify patients at high risk for chronic diseases, thereby enabling clinicians to implement strategies for aggressive prevention/treatment. however, algorithms are strongly influenced by their input data and have already been shown to be less predictive in african-ancestry individuals. already, early application of rprs has found that efficacy is reduced when applied to african-ancestry subjects for t2d. similar application of rprs/gprs for cvd found attenuated effects in african-ancestry populations. factoring in multiethnic gwas data to create gprs/pprwhile accounting for complex population genetics will likely complicate matters further, as there is evidence of latent population structure even within the relatively racially homogenous uk bio bank. moreover, the largest stu dies currently are from european-ancestry populations, and g prs/p prsderived from these data perform poorly when extrapolated to other populations, hence exacerbating existing health disparities in non-white populations. in line with the recent international common disease alliance (icda) white paper, we believe that greater efforts must be made to ensure that all genetic ancestry groups are represented in biobanks linking genetic data and emrs and in the resulting discovery genetic work. metabolomics/proteomics and t2d. one growing area of research is the role of the metabolome/proteome in t2d pathogenesis. although the metabolome/proteome is vast, the majority of research has focused on the strong link between branched-chain amino acids (bcaa) and t2d risk. cross-sectional analyses rst found that bcaa levels were higher in t2d patients compared with healthy control subjects and positively correlated with insulin resistances. this finding was later confirmed in longitudinal data that showed a 2- 3.5/c2 increased risk of t2d with higher bcaa levels in 12 years of follow-up. the association between bcaa levels and t2d risk were later confirmed using mr, a likely causal relationship. given the predictive value of bcaa levels and the widespread use of metabolomic assays for newborn diagnoses (eg, phenylketonuria), 1 promising avenue of investigation is the use of bcaa levels for precision medicine in identifying patients at high risk for t2d and implementing intensive preventative measures. conclusions and perspectives clustering methods allow for more precise sub-phenotyping of t2d and increased understanding of the pathophysiology leading to complex disease. in particular, genetic methodologies offer a wealth of information for a specific patient from a single peripheral blood draw. use of germline genetics for patients in combination with pprs has the potential to identify patients at high risk for specific intermediate phenotypes for t2d (eg, nafld vs lipodystrophy), leading to earlier implementation of interventions tailored to the patient’s specific risk for various pathologic processes leading to t2d. in addition, development of novel methodologies has allowed for increased drug discovery and validation. further work will be required to elucidate and demonstrate the clinical utility of germline genotyping and pprs in t2d, particularly in non-european ancestry populations. obesity and type diabetes are diseases that can substantially decrease life expectancy, diminish quality of life and increase healthcare costs. the incidence of obesity and diabetes continues to rise by epidemic proportions. the term diabesity has been coin ed to describe obesity- dependent diabetes. according to the american diabetes association, in 2002 18.2 million people, or 6.3 percent of the population, had diabetes. diabetes was the sixth leading cause of death listed on u.s. death certificates in 2000. the direct and indirect cost of diabetes in the u.s. in 2002 was estimated at $132 billion. it has been estimated that the annual cost of overweight and obesity in the u.s. is $122.9 billion. this estimate accounts for $64.1 billion in direct costs and $58.8 billion in indirect costs. what is diabetes? diabetes is a disease characterized by high levels of blood glucose resulting from defects in insulin production, insulin action or both. type 1 diabetes develops when the body's immune system destroys pancreatic beta cells, the only cells in the body that make the hormone insulin that regulates blood glucose. this form of diabetes usually strikes children and young adults, although disease onset can occur at any age. type 1 diabetes accounts for only five to 10 percent of all diagnosed cases of diabetes. risk factors for type 1 diabetes include autoimmune, genetic and environmental factors. type 2 diabetes accounts for some 90 to 95 per-cent of all diagnosed cases of diabetes. it usually begins as insulin resistance, a disorder in which the cells do not use insulin properly. as the need for insulin rises, the pancreas gradually loses its by joanne z. rogers, msn, rn, cnsn, aprn, bc-ad, and christopher d. still, do, facn, facp obesity and type 2 diabetes ability to produce insulin. risk of type 2 diabetes the risk of developing type 2 diabetes is determined by some factors that can be modified and others that cannot. some people are at higher risk for developing type 2 diabetes because of their genes. a first-degree relative of a person with types 2 diabetes has a risk five to 10 times higher than a person without a family history. another factor that may increase the risk of type 2 diabetes is low birth weight. intrauterine growth re striction leading to low birth weight seems to be associated with increased risk in adulthood of insulin resistance, glucose intolerance and type 2 diabetes. however, encouraging research studies in the u.s. and abroad have found that lifestyle changes, such as changes in diet and exercise, can prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes among high-risk adults. at all ages, the risk of type 2 diabetes rises with increasing body weight. the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is three to seven times higher in those who are obese than in normal weight adults, and is 20 times more likely in those with a body mass index (bmi) greater than 35 kg/m 2. obesity’s role in the development of type 2 diabetes it is not known for sure why some people develop insulin resistance, but it is known that obesity and lack of physical activity make it worse. the development of insulin resistance is an important component in the development of type diabetes. the connection is also seen in the f act that weight-loss can improve control or cure type 2 diabetes. in addition to the degree of obesity, where the excess body fat is deposited is important in determining the risk of type 2 diabetes. the degree of insulin resistance and the incidence of type 2 diabetes is highest in a person with an apple shape. these persons carry the majority of their excess body weight around their abdomen. in contrast, the pear shaped person carries most of their weight in the hips and thighs and this is not as likely to be associated with insulin resistance. treating obesity will treat type 2 diabetes weight-loss is an important goal for overweight or obese persons, particularly those with type 2 diabetes. moderate and sustained weight-loss (five percent to 10 percent of body weight) can improve insulin action, decrease fasting glucose concentrations and reduce the need for some diabetes medications. a program of diet, exercise and behavior modification can successfully treat obesity, but pharmacotherapy and/or surgery may be warranted. diet weight-loss occurs when energy expenditure exceeds energy intake. creating an energy deficit of 500-1,000 calories per day will result in a one to two pound weight-loss per week. writing down the food, portion size and calorie amount has been found to increase awareness and will provide objective evidence of calorie intake. for effective weight-loss, it is the calories that count, not the proportion of fat, carbohydrates or protein. however, when individuals are losing weight they should follow a diet similar to that recommended in the u.s. dietary guidelines for 2005: fat 20-35 percent of calories; carbo- hydrates 45-65 percent; protein 10-35 percent. for the obese patient with diabetes or insulin resistance, limiting servings of complex carbohydrates may be beneficial. these foods include bread, rice, pasta, potatoes, cereal, peas and sweet potatoes. complex carbohydrates tend to raise blood sugar more than other foods and will cause the body to produce more insulin. with insulin resistance, these increased amounts of insulin can promote weight gain. increasing the amount of fiber in ones diet may be beneficial for both diabetes and obesity. a high intake of dietary fiber, particularly of the soluble type, may improve glycemic control, decreases hyperinsulinemia and lower plasma lipid concentrations in patient s with type 2 diabetes. additionally, high fiber foods assist in weight-loss and long- term weight maintenance by: requiring more chewing and taking longer to eat, providing fewer calories per serving, creating a sense of abdominal fullness and enhancing fullness between meals. physical activity regular physical activity helps maintain weight-loss and prevent regain. it also improves insulin sensitivity and glycemic control, may decrease the risk of developing diabetes and reduces mortality in patients with diabetes. a goal should be set for 30 to 45 minutes of moderate exercise five times per week. the exercise does not need to occur in a single session to be beneficial. dividing the activity into multiple and short episodes produces similar benefits and can enhance compliance. using a pedometer can help set objective exercise goals. gradually increasing the number of steps per day, with a goal of 8,000 steps, is ideal. any increase in activity over baseline will help in age sedentary moderate active male calorie requirements balancing the equation of less calories in and more calories out to promote weight-loss. medication there are several medications intended to treat diabetes, insulin resistance and obesity. a full review of these medications is beyond the scope of this article. however, metformin is one medication that has been found helpful in reducing the risk of type diabetes in patients with insulin resistance. metformin reduced the rate of progression to diabetes in obese persons with im-paired glucose tolerance. men treated with metformin who had central obesity and other features of metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance, hypertension, hyperlipidemia) had slightly more weight-loss and slightly lower fasting blood glucoses that those given a placebo. bariatric surgery according to the national institute of health (nih), bariatric surgery should be considered by those who have a bmi greater than 40, or have a bmi of 35-39.9 and medical problems such as diabetes, heart disease or sleep apnea. bariatric surgery changes the nor mal digestive process. there are three types of surgery: restrictive, malabsorptive and combined restrictive/mal absorptive. the nih web site provides an overview of the procedures and how they produce weight-loss. studies continue to show that diabetes can be cured in many patients using bariatric surgery. these clinical improvements occur not only because of the significant weight-loss, but be-cause of hormonal changes that occur when foods bypass the stomach. patients and their doctors need to consider the risk of bariatric surgery compared to the risk of obesity and the associated medical problems. when other methods of weight-loss have failed, bariatric surgery may be the best chance for significant and sustained weight-loss. prevention preventing and treating obesity will help in the prevention and treatment of diabetes. promoting a healthy lifestyle in children and adolescents will put them on a path that will decrease their risk of diabetes and its complications. helping adults at high risk for diabetes to change their diet and lifestyle may prevent them from developing diabetes and its consequences. diabetes is a term used to describe a cluster of conditions in which the body is unable to produce any or enough effective insulin. this is a hormone needed for glucose to enter the cells to be converted to energy. glucose is the fuel that your body needs. in your diet, this comes from foods such as fruit, milk, some vegetables, starchy foods and sugar. to help control your blood glucose you will need to eat healthy foods and be active. you may also need to take pills and /or insulin. there are two main types of diabetes type 1: commonly diagnosed in children and adolescents, this occurs when the pancreas is unable to produce insulin. type 2: usually developed in adulthood, this occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin and when the body does not effectively use the insulin that is produced. eating tips for diabetes 1. eat three meals each day, including breakfast. 2. try not to skip meals. 3. space meals 4 to 6 hours apart. 4. breakfast, lunch and supper should be about the same size. 5. avoid very large or very small meals. 6. have one piece of fresh fruit at each meal. 7. limit juice to 1/2 cup per day. 8. limit your intake to high fat foods, including deep fried or fried foods. 9. limit meat portions to the size of t he palm of your hand and choose fish or skinless poultry more often. 10. be careful of added fats. choose low fat or fat free dressings or spreads . eat right on the plate meal plan half of a standard dinner plate should contain at least two kinds of vegetables. of the remaining half, one quarter should contain starches such as potato, rice or pasta. the other quarter should contain protein, such as fish, lean meat, chicken, beans or lentils. also, be sure to have a beverage like milk and a piece of fresh fruit. handy portion guide your hands can be very useful in estimating appropriate portions. when planning a meal, use the following portion sizes as a guide: a serving size of peanut butter or cheese would be the size of two thumbs. a thumb-tip equals a teaspoon. three thumb-tips equal a tablespoon, about the amount of milk you would put in coffee. the palm of your hand equals a serving of meat, fish or poultry. this is about three ounces. a fist equals a cup. this would be the size of a serving of grains and starches. the fasting or before meal target should be 4.0 7.0 mmol/l, and that the 2 -hour post meal target should be 5.0 10.0 mmol/l. however, targets need to be individualized. ask your health care provider or diabetes education program what your blood glucose targets should be and your risk of hypoglycemia hypoglycemia this refers to a blood glucose level of less than 4 mmol/lor when symptoms are present at a level close to this. symptoms may include : trembling, shaky sweaty difficulty concentrating or thinking hungry be sure to inform any significant others of these potential symptoms for early hypoglycemia recognition. causes of hypoglycemia include: eating less than usual, or delayed meals or snacks undertaking more physical activity than usual recent weight loss drinking alcohol taking too much medication (diabetes pill or insulin). what you need to do: 1. dont wait. act now! chew 15 grams of glucose tablets or drink 3/4 cup (175 ml) of juice or regular pop 2. follow- up check your blood sugar after 15 minutes. if less than 4 mmol/l, treat again if your usual meal is more than 1 hour away, you need a snack of slower -acting foods such as 6 crackers and cheese 3. check your blood sugar before and after treating a low blood sugar, if possible when to ask for assistance it is important to know the times when you need assistance. hypoglycemia (low blood glucose) and hyperglycemia (high blood glucose) can both become serious conditions if left untreated. when to call your health care provider, visit an emergency department or call for an ambulance (911): hypoglycemia: more than 2 readings/day less than 4 mmol/lor3-4 readings less than 4 mmol/l in a week or any severe low blood glucose (where you need help). hyperglycemia: for 2 consecutive days readings are higher than 14 mmol/l or you are experiencing symptoms such as; nausea, vomiting, blurry vision, urinating more than usual, feeling weak or tired, or being unable to eat or drink. t2d is characterized by hyperglycemia from a combination of insulin resistance and relative deficiency of insulin secretion. the contribution of insulin resistance to diabetes pathogenesis explains the clinical association of diabetes with obesity and, subsequently, the coincidence of increasing t2d prevalence with increasing prevalence and severity of obesity in children. 4 differences have been described in the natural history of youth-onset t2d and adult-onset t2d. compared with adults, t2 din youth appears to progress more rapidly, with higher rates of metformin treatment failure and more rapid rates of beta cell decline. 5-7 the presence of diabetes encumbers those affected with a long-term burden of chronic disease and an increased risk of cardiovascular and microvascular complications. this risk in- creases with the duration of the disease, putting children with t2d at extremely high risk for complications. follow-up data from both the search for diabetes in youth study and the treatment options for diabetes in youth (today) trial have found a substantial presence of diabetes complications as early as adolescence and young adulthood. 8-11 moreover, the prevalence of complications and overall mortality are higher in youth with t2d compared with adults with t2d or even youth with type 1 diabetes. this burden of disease underscores the need to improve our understanding of diabetes risk, prevention, and optimal treatment in youth. t2 dis a complex, multifactorial disease influenced by both environmental factors and genetic variation as well as their interactions. the heritability of t2d is demonstrated by both the high concordance rates in identical twins and the typical presence of a family history of t2d in those with the disease. investigations of the genetics of diabetes risk have examined both overall t2d risk as well as individual glycemic traits that may predispose to diabetes, such as fasting glucose levels, insulin secretion, insulin resistance, and b-cell function. understanding the genetic underpinnings of diabetes risk offers an opportunity to improve both our knowledge of the mechanisms contributing to diabetes pathogenesis and our understanding of how best to individualize diabetes treatment and prevent complications. here we review the current state of t2d genetics, specifically as it pertains to children and adolescents. monogenic diabetes, diabetes as a result of a single gene abnormality, or mono-genic diabetes, shares clinical overlap with t2d, particularly t2d in youth. there are 3 major subgroups of monogenic diabetes: neonatal diabetes, syndromic diabetes, and maturity-onset diabetes of the young (mody). Neonatal diabetes presents in infancy, although only a subset of infants develops diabetes in the neonatal period (the first 30 days of life); the majority of patients become symptomatic within the first 6 months of life. syndromic diabetes presents with additional extra pancreatic features, typically also in in-fancy. mody is characterized by noninsulin-dependent diabetes diagnosed at a young age (<25 years) demonstrating an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. subtypes of mody are based on specific genetic defects, with involvement of different genes associated with differences in clinical and physiologic phenotypes. monogenic diabetes can be caused by pathogenic muta- tions in genes that disrupt glucose sensing, insulin transcription, the potassium adenosine triphosphate channel that transduces the signal for insulin release, the insulin gene, or pancreatic development. understanding the genes associated with monogenic forms of diabetes has provided insight into the disease mechanisms of diabetes. eleven different genes have been identied as causal for mody in the online mendelian inheritance in man catalog: hnf4 a(mody1), gck(mody2), hnf1 a(mody3), pdx1 (mody4), hnf1 b(mody5), neurod1 (mody6), cel(mody8), ins(mody10), abcc8 (mody12), kcnj11 (mody13), and appl1 (mody14). note that the genes previously re- ported as causal for mody7, mody9, and mody11 are absent from this list, owing to the recent proposal to eliminate them from the list of causal mody genes based on up-dated genetic evidence. mutations in the hnf4 aand hnf1 a genes lead to abnormal insulin secretion, and mody caused by variants in these genes can be effectively managed with oral sulfonylurea therapy. the gene encoding glucokinase, which phosphorylates glucose to glucose--phosphatein pancreatic cells and acts as a glucose sensor, is characterized by a mild, stable hyperglycemia with a low risk of com-plications that commonly does not require any treatment. given the clinical overlap between t2d and rarer forms of diabetes, a long-held hypothesis is that the genetic underpinnings of both common and rare forms of diabetes might not be entirely distinct. multiple studies have shown that mody affects a small but not insignicant subset of youth with diabetes, including those clinically diagnosed with t2 d. the search for diabetes in youth study published the first systematic study of mody prevalence in us youth, which re-ported a 1.2% overall prevalence of mody. a genetic sequencing study of participants in the today study found that 4.5% carried a pathogenic variant in a mody gene. a larger genetic study conducted by the progress in diabetes genetics in youth (prodigy) consortium that included the today cohort, a second cohort recruited by the today researchers for genetic studies, and a subset of the search for diabetes in youth study participants identified a 2.8% incidence of mody. these studies focused on rare, highly penetrant variants in known mody genes. in adult studies of t2d genetics, there is increasing overlap of common variant associations and genes associated with monogenic diabetes. although such associations have not yet been shown in youth with t2d, it is possible that further examination of rarer variants will find associations along a spectrum of disease risk in genes or pathways relevant to diabetes. candidate gene studies many efforts to understand the genetic underpinnings of t2 din children have focused on genetic variants with known associations with glycemic traits or t2d risk in adults, examining whether similar associations exist in youth. individual variants have been shown to have similar associations in children for both fasting glucose and the homeostasis model assessment of b-cell function. several t2d risk genes have been associated with youth-onset t2 d, including tcf7 l2, slc16 a11, and abca1. genetic risk scores (grss), which allow for the assessment of the aggregate genetic risk of a given trait, have demonstrated association of grss constructed from variants associated in adults with glycemic traits and/or t2d risk with fasting glucose and measures of b-cell function, 35-37as well as measures of insulin resistance in youth. two studies have examined the ability of grss to identify children at risk of progressing to t2 d; even though the scores were shown to be associated with t2d risk, 36,39in one of the studies clinical factors such as body mass index (bmi) and family history of t2d had higher predictive utility.  genome-wide association studies since the first genome-wide association study (gwas) for t2 din adults was published in 2007, there has been an explosion of genetic discoveries related to adult t2d with extremely well-powered studies and advanced analytic techniques. at the time of this publication, >400 variants have been associated with t2 din adults. in comparison, large scale studies of pediatric t2d have not been conducted, largely due to limited sample sizes. the prodigy study is a collaborative effort to increase understanding of the genetics of t2d in youth by combining the sample sizes and rich phenotypic data of 2 pediatric t2d studies with the genetic prowess and resources of a large-scale adult diabetes genetics consortium. in prodigy, we conducted the first gwas for t2d in youth to identify genetic variants specifically predisposing to youth-onset t2d. we performed our genetic analysis in 3006 multiethnic youth with t2d who were autoantibody-negative for selected pancreatic autoantibodies and 6061 adult controls aged >50 years and diabetes-free. functional studies of candidate genes are needed to understand how the identified genetic variants affect disease risk. studies evaluating the interplay between lifestyle and genetic factors are also needed to comprehensively evaluate t2d risk in youth. applications of genetics in youth-onset t2d there has been substantive growth in our understanding of the genetics of t2 din youth secondary to large-scale improvements in genotyping technology, next-generation sequencing techniques, and collaborative approaches such as prodigy to increase sample sizes. here we appraise the various applications of genetics as it pertains to pediatric t2d. todd characterizing disease subtypes pediatric t2d is a heterogenous disease likely because of differing contributions from both environmental and genetic factors, as well as varying degrees of insulin resistance and b- cell dysfunction among individuals. the benefit of sulfonyl-ureas in mody is a concrete example of how genetics can be used to characterize disease and dictate treatment. although not always as targeted, genetics also can be used to characterize subtypes for the more common form of t2d. a soft clustering approach has been used to deconstruct the heterogeneity of t2d with groups of loci representing various mechanisms of disease based on b-cell function, insulin resistance, and fat. these efforts to categorize subtypes help to better characterize pathophysiology, with the hope of informing clinical management and the risk of complications in the future. the benefit of using genetic data to characterize disease is that it remains unchanged over an individuals lifetime and can be measured even before symptoms develop, a particularly valuable characteristic for high-risk children who often have very short latent periods before full-blown t2d develops. risk prediction current guidelines from the american diabetes association recommend screening youth with obesity for t2d based on the presence of certain additional risk factors, including a family history of t2d, high-risk race/ethnicity, maternal his-tory of gestational diabetes, and physical features associated with insulin resistance, such as acanthosis nigricans. although these criteria allow clinicians to readily identify youth requiring diabetes screening, it is not clear which of these youth will go on to develop t2d. in addition, there is no simple or direct correlation between clinical features as body mass index, fasting insulin level, or c-peptide level and the progression to t2d. in the early days of t2d gwas efforts, studies showed that a polygenic risk score for t2d in adults does not outperform clinical models of prediction, but when added to routine clinical risk factors, genetic information may enhance predictive utility, particularly for populations of younger adults in whom risk factors, such as glucose intolerance, might not have fully manifested. recently, a trans-ancestry polygenic risk score (prs) of 1 259 754 hap map3 variants and weights showed that the top 2% of the prs distribution can identify adults with a roughly 2.5- to 4.5-fold increase in t2d risk. using the top 2% of the prs as the classier, the reported prevalence-adjusted positive predictive value was 0.26 and the negative predictive value was 0.90. although the current clinical utility of prss remains limited, in the future more sophisticated scores derived from diverse populations likely will continue to improve the predictive performance of these scores. insight into biologic mechanisms genetic discovery can help uncover underlying biology related to t2d with the interrogation of pathways related to the genetic loci. for example, the intronic snprs7903146 in tcf7 l2, which has one of the strongest known effect sizes for common variants in both youth and adults with t2 d, 33,40,45has been localized to islet-selective open chromatin in b-cells using a method called formaldehyde assisted isolation of regulatory elements sequencing. the high-risk t allele has been associated with increased transcription in islets and increased expression on cellular luciferase as says compared with the c allele, highlighting a mechanism by which this polymorphism may contribute to t2d risk. complementary approaches of studying diabetes and glycemic traits as well as regulatory and functional data can help improve our understanding of the underlying mechanisms contributing to t2d risk and progression. this is particularly important in youth, who have slightly different underlying pathogenic mechanisms compared with adults with t2d, such as b-cell hyperresponsiveness in the early disease phase and a higher rate of b-cell decline. predicting response to interventions often in clinical medicine, patients do not respond or have adverse effects to medications that take time to uncover, leading to delays in optimal management, patient dissatisfaction, and wasted resources. genetics may help identify those patients who may benefit the most from a certain intervention, allowing us to stratify patients, which in turn could lead to better targeting of clinical or public health interventions. for example, the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention was effective even in the participants with the greatest genetic risk burden for figure. schematic depicting how various pathophysiologic mechanisms that contribute to diabetes risk have underlying genetic contributions that can be distinct or overlapping with other processes. in adults, there has been extensive work evaluating the genetic determinants of metformin response, given the significant interindividual variability in metformin response and evidence of significant heritability, with gwass so far identifying 5 variants associated with metformin response. similarly, sulfonyl-ureas are metabolized predominantly by cytochrome p450 2 c9 (cyp2 c9), and loss-of-function alleles in cyp2 cp have been associated with a greater response to sulfonyl-ureas. there have been no pharmacogenetic studies of t2d in youth reported to date, and this is an area where additional research is needed. for example, 50% of youth on metformin therapy do not have sustained glycemic control, 5a greater proportion than seen in adults. the mechanisms behind this difference is unclear, and identifying genetic variants associated with metformin response in youth potentially could help elucidate the reasons for treatment failure. conclusions given the exponential rise in the incidence of t2 din youth, the aggressive nature of the disease compared with adults, and the significant heritability of the disease, it is critical that we strive to better understand the genetic basis of t2d in youth. although studies of pediatric t2d genetics have lagged behind adult studies largely because of the difficulty conducting studies with large sample sizes, technological advances and collaborative efforts have helped moved the eld forward. however, much remains to be discovered, and further large-scale efforts with computational and functional follow-up of findings are needed to continue to advance our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of t2d in youth. the knowledge of genetics can be used to better understand the pathophysiology of the disease in youth, characterize subtypes, assist with disease prediction, and aid the targeting of pharmacologic interventions with the ultimate goal of developing a personalized medicine approach to tackle youth-onset t2d. 