what is diabetes? diabetes is a condition that causes blood sugar (blood glucose) levels to rise higher than normal. hyperglycemia is the term doctors use to describe high blood sugar. when you eat, your body breaks food down into glucose and sends it into the blood. Insulin, a hormone made in your pancreas, helps move the glucose from your blood into your blood cells as fuel for energy. your pancreas is an organ in your abdomen (stomach). there are three types of diabetes: type, type 2, and gestational diabetes (diabetes you have when you’re pregnant). what is type 2 diabetes? in type 2 diabetes, your body has trouble using the insulin its making. this is called insulin resistance, and it causes your blood sugar to rise higher than normal. first, your pancreas makes more insulin to make up for this. but over time, it isn’t able to keep your blood sugar levels in a normal range. when blood sugar levels stay high for extended periods of time, it increases your risk of other medical problems like heart attacks, kidney disease, blindness, and nerve pain. what treatments are used for type 2 diabetes? the goal of treatment is to help you feel good and prevent long term problems caused by diabetes. to meet these goals, your health care team will collaborate with you to create a care plan that includes lifestyle changes and medications. your care plan will help you reach your treatment goals. the best way to reach these goals is to: have an eating plan that meets your needs and helps you reach your goals. What you eat, how much you eat, and when you eat are all important. stay physically active and get regular exercise. take your medications (both pills and injected medications) as prescribed by your doctor. understanding type 2 diabetes needing to take medication, including insulin, to manage your type 2 diabetes does not mean you failed. taking medication is simply part of good diabetes management. The most important thing you can do to stay healthy with diabetes is manage your blood sugar well and that means taking medication on schedule and making healthy lifestyle choices. type 2 diabetes changes over time. first, healthy eating and physical activity may be enough to reach your targets. but most people end up needing medications, including insulin, at some point to manage their blood sugar, no matter how hard they work to reach their targets. what causes type 2 diabetes? scientists do not know the exact cause of type 2 diabetes. however, developing type 2 diabetes has been linked with several risk factors. these include: how will I know if my diabetes treatment is working? get an a1c blood test at least two times a year. this helps you and your health care team know how well you are managing your blood sugar levels. The a1c test is part of your abcs of diabetes an easy way to check how well your diabetes treatment is working. the ABCs of diabetes are: ais for a1c or estimated average glucose (eag) your a1c test tells you your average blood sugar for the past two to three months. your health care provider may call this your estimated average glucose, also called your eag. the eag shows your a1c results in the same units (mg/dl) as the glucose meter you use at home. b Is for blood pressure your blood pressure numbers tell you the force of blood inside your blood vessels. when your blood pressure is high, your heart must work harder. c is for cholesterol. your cholesterol numbers tell you about the amount of fats in your blood. some kinds of cholesterol can raise your risk for heart attack and stroke. a history of hyperglycemia (high blood sugar), such as prediabetes and/or gestational diabetes are 45 or older are black, hispanic/latino, american indian, asian american, or pacific islander have a parent, brother, or sister with diabetes are overweight are physically inactive have high blood pressure or take medicine for high blood pressure have low hdl cholesterol and/or high triglycerides have been diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome. diabetes mellitus is characterized by abnormally high levels of sugar (glucose) in the blood. when the amount of glucose in the blood increases, e.g., after a meal, it triggers the release of the hormone insulin from the pancreas. insulin stimulates muscle and fat cells to remove glucose from the blood and stimulates the liver to metabolize glucose, causing the blood sugar level to decrease to normal levels . in people with diabetes, blood sugar levels remain high. this may be because insulin is not being produced at all, is not made at sufficient levels, or is not as effective as it should be. the most common forms of diabetes are type 1 diabetes (5%), which is an autoimmune disorder, and type 2 diabetes (95%), which is associated with obesity. gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that occurs in pregnancy, and other forms of diabetes are very rare and are caused by a single gene mutation. for many years, scientists have been searching for clues in our genetic makeup that may explain why some people are more likely to get diabetes than others are. classification diabetes is classified by underlying cause. the categories are: type 1 diabetes an autoimmune disease in which the body's own immune system attacks the pancreas, rendering it unable to produce insulin; type 2 diabetes in which a resistance to the effects of insulin or a defect in insulin secretion may be seen; gestational diabetes; and other types. type 2 diabetes commonly occurs in adults who are obese. there are many underlying factors that contribute to the high blood glucose levels in these individuals. an important factor is the body's resistance to insulin in the body, essentially ignoring its insulin secretions. a second factor is the falling production of insulin by the beta cells of the pancreas. therefore, an individual with type 2 diabetes may have a combination of deficient secretion and deficient action of insulin. in contrast to type 2, type 1 diabetes most commonly occurs in children and is a result of the body's immune system attacking and destroying the beta cells. the trigger for this autoimmune attack is not clear, but the result is the end of insulin production. comparison of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. type 1 diabetes type 2 diabetes phenotype onset primarily in childhood and adolescence onset predominantly after 40 years of age thin or normal weight often obese prone to ketoacidosis no ketoacidosis insulin administration required for survival insulin administration not required for survival pancreas is damaged by an autoimmune attack pancreas is not damaged by an autoimmune attack absolute insulin deficiency relative insulin deficiency and/or insulin resistance treatment: insulin injections treatment: (1) healthy diet and increased exercise; (2) hypoglycemic tablets; (3) insulin injections genotype increased prevalence in relatives increased prevalence in relatives type 2 diabetes is increasingly diagnosed in younger patients. history of diabetes physicians have observed the effects of diabetes for thousands of years. for much of this time, little was known about this fatal disease that caused wasting away of the body, extreme thirst, and frequent urination. it wasn't until 1922 that the first patient was successfully treated with insulin. one of the effects of diabetes is the presence of glucose in the urine (glucosuria). ancient hindu writings, many thousands of years old, document how black ants and flies were attracted to the urine of diabetics. the indian physician sushruta in 400 b.c. described the sweet taste of urine from affected individuals, and for many centuries to come, the sweet taste of urine was key to diagnosis. around 250 b.c., the name diabetes was first used. it is a greek word that means to syphon , reflecting how diabetes seemed to rapidly drain fluid from the affected individual. the greek physician aretaeus noted that as affected individuals wasted away, they passed increasing amounts of urine as if there was liquefaction of flesh and bones into urine. the complete term diabetes mellitus was coined in 1674 by thomas willis, personal physician to king charles ii. mellitus is latin for honey, which is how willis described the urine of diabetics (as if imbued with honey and sugar). up until the mid-1800s, the treatments offered for diabetes varied tremendously. various fad diets were prescribed, and the use of opium was suggested, as were bleeding and other therapies. the most successful treatments were starvation diets in which calorie intake was severely restricted. naturally, this was intolerable for the patient and at best extended life expectancy for a few years. a breakthrough in the puzzle of diabetes came in 1889. german physicians joseph von mering and oskar minkowski surgically removed the pancreas from dogs. the dogs immediately developed diabetes. now that a link was established between the pancreas gland and diabetes, research focused on isolating the pancreatic extract that could treat diabetes. when dr. frederick banting took up the challenge of isolating a pancreatic extract, he was met with much skepticism. many great physiologists had tried and failed to isolate an internal secretion from the pancreas. but banting, a surgeon, persisted and in may 1921, he began work in the laboratory of professor john macloed in toronto, canada. charles best, a medical student at the time, worked as his assistant. to concentrate what we now know as insulin, banting tied the pancreatic ducts of dogs. the pancreatic cells that released digestive enzymes (and could also destroy insulin) degenerated, but the cells that secreted insulin were spared. over several weeks the pancreas degenerated into a residue from which insulin could be extracted. in july 1921, a dog that had had its pancreas surgically removed was injected with an extract collected from a duct- tied dog. in the two hours that followed the injection, the blood sugar level of the dog fell, and its condition improved. another de-pancreatized (diabetic-like) dog was kept alive for eight days by regular injections until supplies of the extract, at that time called "isletin", were exhausted.2 genetic landscape of diabetes further experiments on dogs showed that extracts from the pancreas caused a drop in blood sugar, caused glucose in the urine to disappear, and produced a marked improvement in clinical condition. so long as the extract was being given, the dogs were kept alive. the supply of the extract was improved: the pancreas of different animals were used until that of the cow was settled upon. this extract kept a de-pancreatized dog alive for days. dr. j. collip, a biochemist, was drafted to continue improving the purity of the pancreas extract, and later, best carried on this work. a young boy, leonard thompson, was the first patient to receive insulin treatment. on january 11, 1922, aged 14 and weighing only 64 pounds, he was extremely ill. the first injections of insulin only produced a slight lowering of blood sugar level. the extract still was not pure enough, and abscesses developed at the injection site. collip continued to refine the extract. several weeks later, leonard was treated again and showed a remarkable recovery. his blood sugar levels fell, he gained weight and lived for another 13 years. he died from pneumonia at the age of 27. during the spring of 1922, best increased the production of insulin to enable the treatment of diabetic patients coming to the toronto clinic. over the next 60 years, insulin was further refined and purified, and long-acting and intermediate types were developed to provide more flexibility. a revolution came with the production of recombinant human dna insulin in 1978. instead of collecting insulin from animals, new human insulin could be synthesized. in 1923, banting and macloed were awarded the nobel prize for the discovery of insulin. banting split his prize with best, and macloed split his prize with collip. in his nobel lecture, banting concluded the following about their discovery: insulin is not a cure for diabetes; it is a treatment. it enables the diabetic to burn sufficient carbohydrates, so that proteins and fats may be added to the diet in sufficient quantities to provide energy for the economic burdens of life. epidemiology box 1. increase of diabetes in adults in the united states. about 5 million do not know they have the disease (1). type 1 diabetes accounts for 5-10% of cases, affecting 1 of 400 children and adolescents. type 2 diabetes is extremely common, accounting for 90-95% of all cases of diabetes. this form of diabetes can go undiagnosed for many years, but the number of cases that are being diagnosed is rising rapidly, leading to reports of a diabetes epidemic. the type 2 diabetes epidemic when people think of epidemics, they often think of infectious diseases such as sars, hiv, or the flu. however, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes is now at epidemic proportions. in the united states, diabetes accounts for over 130 billion dollars of health care costs and is the fifth leading cause of death (2). the number of new cases being diagnosed continues to rise. it has been estimated that of the children born in the year 2000, 1 of 3 will suffer from diabetes at some point in their lifetime (3). diabetes is predicted to become one of the most common diseases in the world within a couple of decades, affecting at least half a billion people (4). estimate your risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the past, type 2 was rarely seen in the young, hence its original name of adult-onset diabetes. but now type 2 diabetes is increasingly being diagnosed in young adults and even in children. in japan, more children suffer from type 2 than type 1 (juvenile onset) diabetes. this young generation of diabetics will have many decades in which to develop the complications of diabetes. in 1990, 4.9% of the american population were diagnosed with diabetes. this increased to 7.9% by the year 2001 (5). obesity the driving force behind the high prevalence of diabetes is the rise of obesity in the population. in today's society, it can be difficult to maintain a healthy weight. we have the combination of ample food and a sedentary lifestyle. this is in stark contrast to only a couple of hundred years ago, when people were more active and food supplies were not as abundant. as a result, many of us are heavier than we should be. calculate your ideal weight4 genetic landscape of diabetes being overweight or obese is defined by a calculation called the body mass index (bmi). it is a calculation that takes your height and weight into consideration and gives you a score. a score of .9 is a healthy weight. if you are overweight, your score lies within the range to 2529.9; a score of 30 and above indicates obesity. calculate your bmi in 1991, it was estimated that 12% of the population were obese (5). by the year 2001, this had increased to an estimated 20.9% of the population; this represents over 44 million obese adult americans. amore recent study estimated that a record 30% of the american population are now obese (6) obesity is a major problem for the united states. every year, an estimated 300,000 us adults die of causes related to obesity (7). obesity is also a huge economic burden, accounting for up to 4% of healthcare costs in the united states (8). thrifty genes epidemics of infectious diseases increase when there is increased spread of the infectious agent and decrease when the number of victims who are susceptible falls (they either become immune or they die). an epidemic of a genetic disease such as type 2 diabetes is similar. the number of cases rises when there is a rise in environmental risk (abundant food supplies, lack of activity) and decreases when the number of susceptible individuals falls (by deaths from the complications of diabetes). the classic example of an epidemic of diabetes is found on an remote island in the pacific ocean, the island of nauru. before the turn of the 20th century, the lifestyle of nauruans was harsh. the soil was poor, agriculture was difficult, and frequent episodes of starvation were common. despite these adverse conditions, the islanders were noted to be heavy. in 1922, it was discovered that nauru contained phosphate rock, which was then mined for use in fertilizer, and for which the islanders received royalties. over several decades, the nauruans became extremely wealthy, and with their new-found riches came major lifestyle changes. food was now abundant and could be bought from stores. instead of fishing and farming, nauruans now led sedentary lives. by the 1950s, type 2 diabetes exploded from being non-existent in this population to affecting 2 of 3 adults over the age of 55 and becoming a common cause of death. the case of the nauruans is an extreme case of how type 2 diabetes can rapidly reach epidemic proportions, and thrifty genes may be involved. it has been postulated by neel (9) that genes that are metabolically thrifty give a survival advantage in times when there is a constant threat of famine and starvation. when food is abundant, these genes aid the efficient metabolism of the food, enabling rapid build up of fat stores. this enabled people like the nauruans to survive food shortages later on. but when food is always abundant, a thrifty genetic makeup turns into a survival disadvantage. thrifty genes cause obesity, which in turn predisposes to diabetes. the epidemic that took hold of the island of nauru is now emerging in developing countries and already has a firm hold on the developed world. physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation overview of glucose metabolism glucose is an essential fuel for the body (figure 1). the amount of glucose in the bloodstream is regulated by many hormones, the most important being insulin. insulin is the hormone of plentyit is released when glucose is abundant and stimulates the following: muscle and fat cells to remove glucose from the blood cells to breakdown glucose, releasing its energy in the form of atp (via glycolysis and the citric acid cycle) the liver and muscle to store glucose as glycogen (short-term energy reserve) adipose tissue to store glucose as fat (long-term energy reserve) cells to use glucose in protein synthesis glucagon is the main hormone opposing the action of insulin and is released when food is scarce. whereas insulin triggers the formation of glycogen (an energy-requiring process, or an anabolic effect), glucagon triggers glycogen breakdown, which releases energy (a catabolic effect). glucagon also helps the body to switch to using resources other than glucose, such as fat and protein (figure 2). regulation of blood glucose blood glucose levels are not constant they rise and fall depending on the body's needs, regulated by hormones. this results in glucose levels normally ranging from 70 to 110 mg/dl. the blood glucose level can rise for three reasons: diet, breakdown of glycogen, or through hepatic synthesis of glucose. eating produces a rise in blood glucose, the extent of which depends on a number of factors such as the amount and the type of carbohydrate eaten (i.e., the glycemic index), the rate of digestion, and the rate of absorption. because glucose is a polar molecule, its absorption across the hydrophobic gut wall requires specialized glucose transporters (gluts) of which there are five types. in the gut, glut2 and glut5 are the most common. the liver is a major producer of glucose it releases glucose from the breakdown of glycogen and also makes glucose from intermediates of carbohydrate, protein, and fat metabolism. the liver is also a major consumer of glucose and can buffer glucose levels. it receives glucose-rich blood directly from the digestive tract via the portal vein (figure 3). the liver quickly removes large amounts of glucose from the circulation so that even after a meal, the blood glucose levels rarely rise above 110 mg/dl in a non-diabetic.6 genetic landscape of diabetes figure. overview of glucose metabolism. glucose is used for many purposes in the body. it can be converted into energy via pyruvate and the tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle, as well as being converted to fat (long-term storage) and glycogen (short-term storage). some amino acids may also be synthesized directly from pyruvate; thus, glucose may also indirectly contribute to protein synthesis. figure 2. anabolism and catabolism of glucose. glucose metabolism involves both energy-producing (catabolic, shown in orange) and energy-consuming (anabolic, shown in green) processes. introduction to diabetes 7 box . the liver buffers glucose levels. the liver receives glucose-rich blood from the digestive tract via the portal vein (figure 3). the liver has a high amount of glut2 transporters that do not need the presence of insulin to transport glucose into the liver cells. glut2 has a low affinity for glucose which enables a rapid influx of glucose when sugar levels are high. therefore, in the liver, levels of glucose inside and outside the cell can become equal (an equilibrium is reached). the first step for trapping glucose inside the cell involves phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate (g6 p). the liver differs from the rest of the body in that it uses the enzyme glucokinase, rather than hexokinase. glucokinase can produce g6 pat a faster rate and also is not inhibited by its product (this is because in the liver, g6 pcan be channeled into making glycogen). glucose and insulin both modulate metabolic enzymes in such a way that glycogen formation is promoted. this drives forward the process of bringing more glucose into the liver. insulin promotes glycogen synthesis by stimulating glycogen synthetase and inhibiting glycogen phosphorylase. after a mealthe role of insulin the rise in blood glucose following a meal is detected by the pancreatic beta cells, which respond by releasing insulin. insulin increases the uptake and use of glucose by tissues such as skeletal muscle and fat cells. this rise in glucose also inhibits the release of glucagon, inhibiting the production of glucose from other sources, e.g., glycogen break down (figure 4). 1. use glucose once inside the cell, some of the glucose is used immediately via glycolysis. this is a central pathway of carbohydrate metabolism because it occurs in all cells in the body, and because all sugars can be converted into glucose and enter this pathway. during the well-fed state, the high levels of insulin and low levels of glucagon figure 3. the portal circulation. the portal vein drains almost all of the blood from the digestive tract and empties directly into the liver. this circulation of nutrient- rich blood between the gut and liver is called the portal circulation. it enables the liver to remove any harmful substances that may have been digested before the blood enters the main blood circulation around the body the systemic circulation. genetic landscape of diabetes stimulate glycolysis, which releases energy and produces carbohydrate intermediates that can be used in other metabolic pathways. glycolysis in stryer's biochemistry. make glycogen any glucose that is not used immediately is taken up by the liver and muscle where it can be converted into glycogen (glycogenesis). insulin stimulates glycogenesis in the liver by: stimulating hepatic glycogen synthetase (the enzyme that catalyzes glycogen synthesis in the liver) inhibiting hepatic glycogen phosphorylase (the enzyme that catalyzes glycogen breakdown in the liver) inhibiting glucose synthesis from other sources (inhibits gluconeogenesis) insulin also encourages glycogen formation in muscle, but by a different method. here it increases the number of glucose transporters (glut4) on the cell surface. this leads to a rapid uptake of glucose that is converted into muscle glycogen. changes in key hormones after a meal. changes in blood levels of glucose, insulin, and glucagon after a carbohyrate-rich meal (ingested at time 0 minutes). glycogen metabolism in stryer's biochemistry. make fat when glycogen stores are fully replenished, excess glucose is converted into fat in a process called lipogenesis. glucose is converted into fatty acids that are stored as triglycerides (three fatty acid molecules attached to one glycerol molecule) for storage. insulin promotes lipogenesis by: increasing the number of glucose transporters (glut4) expressed on the surface of the fat cell, causing a rapid uptake of glucose increasing lipoprotein lipase activity, which frees up more fatty acids for triglyceride synthesis in addition to promoting fat synthesis, insulin also inhibits fat breakdown by inhibiting hormone-sensitive lipase (an enzyme that breaks down fat stores). as a result, there are lower levels of fatty acids in the blood stream. fatty acid metabolism in stryer's biochemistry insulin also has an anabolic effect on protein metabolism. it stimulates the entry of amino acids into cells and stimulates protein production from amino acids. fasting the role of glucagon fasting is defined as more than eight hours without food. the resulting fall in blood sugar levels inhibits insulin secretion and stimulates glucagon release. glucagon opposes many actions of insulin. most importantly, glucagon raises blood sugar levels by stimulating the mobilization of glycogen stores in the liver, providing a rapid burst of glucose. in 1018 hours, the glycogen stores are depleted, and if fasting continues, glucagon continues to stimulate glucose production by favoring the hepatic uptake of amino acids, the carbon skeletons of which are used to make glucose. in addition to low blood glucose levels, many other stimuli stimulate glucagon release including eating a protein- rich meal (the presence of amino acids in the stomach stimulates the release of both insulin and glucagon, glucagon prevents hypoglycemia that could result from unopposed insulin) and stress (the body anticipates an increased glucose demand in times of stress). starvation the metabolic state of starvation in the us a is more commonly found in people trying to lose weight rapidly or in those who are too unwell to eat. after a couple of days without food, the liver will have exhausted its stores of glycogen but continues to make glucose from protein (amino acids) and fat (glycerol). the metabolism of fatty acids (from adipose tissue) is a major source of energy for organs such as the liver. fatty acids are broken down to acetyl-co a, which is channeled into the citric acid cycle and generates atp. as starvation continues, the levels of acetyl-co a increase until the oxidative capacity of the citric acid cycle is exceeded. the liver processes these excess fatty acids into ketone bodies (3-hydroxybutyrate) to be used by many tissues as an energy source. the most important organ that relies on ketone production is the brain because it is unable to metabolize fatty acids. during the first few days of starvation, the brain uses glucose as a fuel. if starvation continues for more than two weeks, the level of circulating ketone bodies is high enough to be used by the brain. this slows down the need for glucose production from amino acid skeletons, thus slowing down the loss of essential proteins. diabetes is often referred to as starvation in the midst of plenty because the intracellular levels of glucose are low, although the extracellular levels may be extremely high. as in starvation, type diabetics use non-glucose sources of energy, such as fatty acids and ketone bodies, in their peripheral tissues. but in contrast to the starvation state, the production of ketone bodies can spiral out of control. because the ketones are weak acids, they acidify the blood. the result is the metabolic state of diabetic ketoacidosis (dka). hyperglycemia and ketoacidosis are the hallmark of type 1 diabetes (figure 5). hypertriglyceridemia is also seen in dka. the liver combines triglycerol with protein to form very low density lipoprotein (vldl). it then releases vld linto the blood. in diabetics, the enzyme that normally degrades lipoproteins (lipoprotein lipase) is inhibited by the low level of insulin and the high level of glucagon. as a result, the levels of vldl and chylomicrons (made from lipid from the diet) are high in dka. low-carbohydrate diet low-carbohydrate diets, such as the atkins and south beach diets, are currently popular ways to lose weight. such diet plans involve restricting the type and amount of carbohydrate eaten. one of the earliest descriptions of a low-carbohydrate diet was by william banting in the 1860s in england. at the age of 66, banting found success in following a carbohydrate-restricted diet: in the course of one year, he lost 46 pounds of his initial weight of 202 pounds. his impression was that any starchy or saccharine matter tends to the disease of corpulence in advanced life. he claimed he was never hungry and that the great charms and comfort of the system are that its effects are palpable within a week of trial and creates a natural stimulus to persevere for a few weeks more. in a recent small trial, 63 obese men and women were assigned to either a low-carbohydrate diet or a low-fat diet (1). people on both diets lost weight. the carbohydrate-restricted group initially lost weight at a faster rate, but when reviewed at the end of the year there was no significant difference in weight loss between the two groups (1). it was found that low-carbohydrate dieters (who were allowed unrestricted amounts of protein and fat) actually had a lower energy intake than the low-fat diets (who were limited in their calorie intake). it may be that when carbohydrates are restricted, weight loss is due to a lower calorie intake due to the monotony of the diet. it is also possible that the lower calorie intake may be because of a change in peripheral or central satiety signals, leaving people feeling more full after a meal. a second study compared the effects of a carbohydrate-restricted diet on the risk of developing atherosclerosis (2). 132 severely obese men and women were assigned to either a low-carbohydrate or low-fat diet. again, after a 6-month period both groups lost weight. they became more sensitive to insulin, and their triglyceride (tg) levels, a type of fat that is a risk factor for atherosclerosis, improved. however, the carbohydrate-restricted group lost more weight and showed a greater improvement in insulin sensitivity and tg levels. after one year, the weight loss between the two groups was similar, but the cardiogenic risk factors were improved in the low- carbohydrate dieters, tg levels were lower, and levels of hdl cholesterol, a type of fat that protects against atherosclerosis, were higher (3). also, long-term sugar control, which can be measured by checking for the amount of glycosylated hemoglobin (hb a1c), was better in people on the low-carbohydrate diet. however, it remains unclear whether these beneficial effects would continue after 1 year. at present, the risks of obesity are well known, and the benefits of weight loss by traditional low-calorie, low-fat, and high-complex carbohydrate diets are also well documented. future research will clarify the long-term outcomes of a low-carbohydrate diet for achieving and maintaining a healthy weight together with the effects on the heart and other systems of the body. insulin synthesis the insulin-making cells of the body are called beta cells, and they are found in the pancreas gland. these cells clump together to form the "islets of langerhans", named for the german medical student who described them. the synthesis of insulin begins at the translation of the insulin gene, which resides on chromosome 11. during translation, two introns are spliced out of the m rna product, which encodes a protein of 110 amino acids in length. this primary translation product is called preproinsulin and is inactive. it contains a signal peptide of 24 amino acids in length, which is required for the protein to cross the cell membrane. once the preproinsulin reaches the endoplasmic reticulum, a protease cleaves off the signal peptide to create proinsulin. proinsulin consists of three domains: an amino-terminal b chain, a carboxyl-terminal a chain, and a connecting peptide in the middle known as the c-peptide. metabolic changes in diabetic ketoacidosis. hyperglycemia is caused by the increased production of glucose by the liver (driven by glucagon) and the decreased use of glucose of insulin by peripheral tissues (because of the lack of insulin). proinsulin is exposed to several specific peptidases that remove the c- peptide and generate the mature and active form of insulin. in the golgi apparatus, insulin and free c-peptide are packaged into secretory granules, which accumulate in the cytoplasm of the beta cells. exocytosis of the granules is triggered by the entry of glucose into the beta cells. the secretion of insulin has a broad impact on metabolism. insulin structure in, frederick sanger was awarded his first nobel prize for determining the sequence of the amino acids that make up insulin. this marked the first time that a protein had had the order of its amino acids (the primary sequence) determined. insulin is composed of two chains of amino acids named chain a (21 amino acids) and chain b (30 amino acids) that are linked together by two disulfide bridges. there is a 3rd disulfide bridge within the a chain that links the 6th and 11th residues of the a chain together. in most species, the length and amino acid compositions of chains a and bare similar, and the positions of the three disulfide bonds are highly conserved. for this reason, pig insulin can be used to replace deficient human insulin levels in diabetes patients. today, porcine insulin has largely been replaced by the mass production of human proinsulin by bacteria (recombinant insulin). insulin molecules have a tendency to form dimers in solution, and in the presence of zinc ions, insulin dimers associate into hexamers. whereas monomers of insulin readily diffuse through the blood and have a rapid effect, hexamers diffuse slowly and have a delayed onset of action. in the design of recombinant insulin, the structure of insulin can be modified in a way that reduces the tendency of the insulin molecule to form dimers and hexamers but that does not interrupt binding to the insulin receptor. in this way, a range of preparations of insulin is made, varying from short acting to long acting. insulin secretion rising levels of glucose inside the pancreatic beta cells trigger the release of insulin. glucose is transported into the beta cell by type 2 glucose transporters (glut2). once inside, the first step in glucose metabolism is the phosphorylation of glucose to produce glucose-6-phosphate. this step is catalyzed by glucokinase it is the rate-limiting step in glycolysis, and it effectively traps glucose inside the cell. 2.as glucose metabolism proceeds, atp is produced in the mitochondria. 3.the increase in the atp:adp ratio closes atp-gated potassium channels in the beta cell membrane. positively charged potassium ions (k+) are now prevented from leaving the beta cell. 4.the rise in positive charge inside the beta cell causes depolarization. 5.voltage-gated calcium channels open, allowing calcium ions (ca2+) to flood into the cell. 6.the increase in intracellular calcium concentration triggers the secretion of insulin via exocytosis. there are two phases of insulin release in response to a rise in glucose. the first is an immediate release of insulin. this is attributable to the release of preformed insulin, which is stored in secretory granules. after a short delay, there is a second, more prolonged release of newly synthesized insulin. once released, insulin is active for a only a brief time before it is degraded by enzymes. Insulinase found in the liver and kidneys breaks down insulin circulating in the plasma, and as a result, insulin has a half-life of only about 6 minutes. this short duration of action allows rapid changes in the circulating levels of insulin. insulin receptor the net effect of insulin binding is to trigger a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions. these actions are terminated by dephosphorylation of the insulin receptor. similar to the receptors for other polypeptide hormones, the receptor for insulin is embedded in the plasma membrane and is composed of a pair of alpha subunits and a pair of beta subunits. the alpha subunits are extracellular and contain the insulin-binding site. the beta subunits span the membrane and contain the enzyme tyrosine kinase. kinases are a group of enzymes that phosphorylate proteins (the reverse reaction is catalyzed by a group of enzymes called phosphatases). insulin binding to the alpha subunits induces a conformational change that is transmitted to the beta subunits and causes them to phosphorylate themselves (autophosphorylation). a specific tyrosine of each beta subunit is phosphorylated along with other target proteins, such as insulin receptor substrate (irs). as these and other proteins inside the cell are phosphorylated, this in turn alters their activity, bringing about the wide biological effects of insulin. insulin action the binding of insulin results in a wide range of actions that take place over different periods of time. almost immediately, insulin promotes the uptake of glucose into many tissues that express glut4 glucose transporters, such as skeletal muscle and fat. insulin increases the activity of these transporters and increases their numbers by stimulating their recruitment from an intracellular pool to the cell surface. not all tissues require insulin for glucose uptake. tissues such as liver cells, red blood cells, the gut mucosa, the kidneys, and cells of the nervous system use a glucose transporter that is not insulin dependent. over minutes to hours, insulin alters the activity of various enzymes as a result of changes in their phosphorylation status. over a period of days, insulin increases the amounts of many metabolic enzymes. these reflect an increase in gene transcription, m rna, and enzyme synthesis. the insulin receptor. the insulin receptor is a tyrosine kinase receptor and is composed of a pair of alpha subunits and a pair of beta subunits. insulin binds to the alpha subunits and induces a conformational change that is transmitted to the beta subunits that autophosphorylate and initiate a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions. type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disorder in which the body attacks its pancreatic beta cells. the onset of type 1 diabetes is attributed to both an inherited risk and external triggers, such as diet or an infection. the hunt for these genetic and enviromental risk factors is on-going. about 18 regions of the genome have been linked with influencing type 1 diabetes risk. these regions, each of which may contain several genes, have been labeled iddm1 to iddm18. the most well studied is iddm1, which contains the hla genes that encode immune response proteins. variations in hla genes are an important genetic risk factor, but they alone do not account for the disease and other genes are involved. there are two other non-hla genes which have been identified thus far. one of these non-hla genes, iddm2, is the insulin gene, and the other non-hla gene maps close to ctla4, which has a regulatory role in the immune response. iddm1 contains the hla genes summary hla genes encode molecules that are crucial to the immune system. these molecules hold small chains of amino acids on the cell surface so that immune cells can analyze these chains. when the immune cells find an inappropriate chain, they begin attacking. without hla genes, immune cells would not find the chains of viruses, bacteria, or tumor cells. on the other hand, inheriting certain versions (alleles) of the hla genes increases the probability that immune cells will attack the body's healthy cells. this is how iddm1 contributes to the immune attack of the beta cells and thus type 1 diabetes. background the hla region is a cluster of genes on chromosome 6. the genes encode glycoproteins that are found on the surfaces of most cells and help the immune system to distinguish between self (its own cells, e.g., beta cells of the pancreas) and non-self (e.g., bacteria, viruses). autoimmune disease results when the immune system launches an attack against the body's tissues. the risk of developing autoimmune disease is sometimes related to the alleles of hla genes in the body. type 1 diabetes is unique among these diseases in that hla alleles may increase the risk of diabetes, have no effect, or even be protective. the hla genes encode proteins called major histocompatibility complex (mhc), and there are two main classes of mhc proteins, both of which display chains of amino acids. the chains are called antigens, and immune cells (called tcells) analyze them. mhc present chains from inside cells, whereas mhc present chains from outside the cells. if tcells bind to the chain presented on an mhc, the tcell immediately orchestrates powerful attacks by the body's other immune cells. ideally, the body only contains tcells that bind to chains from infectious organisms (viruses, bacteria, etc.) and tumor cells. healthy development largely achieves this ideal. the alternative is found in autoimmune diseases such as diabetes: tcells bind to chains from the body's healthy cells. there are many different alleles of the hla genes, leading to many different variants of mhc proteins and allowing a variety of chains to be presented to cells. the inheritance of particular hla alleles can account for 17 over half of the genetic risk of developing type diabetes (1). the genes encoding mhc proteins are most strongly linked with diabetes, and these genes are called hla-dr, hla-dq, and hla-dp. in the general population, only half of the people inherit a copy (allele) of dr gene called dr3 and dr4, and less than 3% of the people have two alleles. however, in type 1 diabetes at least one allele of dr3 or dr4 is found in 95% of caucasians, and individuals with both dr3 and dr4 are particularly susceptible to type 1 diabetes (2). conversely, the dr2 allele is protective (3). similar to the dr gene, certain alleles of the dq gene are risk factors for developing the disease, whereas other alleles of dq are protective. there is also a tendency for people who inherit dr3 or dr4 to inherit dq, which adds to their genetic risk of developing diabetes. conversely, the protective alleles of dr and dq tend to be inherited together. these tendencies have complicated the study of the effects of individual hla-dr or hla-dq genes. iddm1 and diabetes: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on iddm1 and diabetes, search pub med . associations between hlaalleles and diabetes began to be documented in the 1970s when serological markers were used. this association was later confirmed with genome-wide scans. the iddm1 locus contains many diabetes susceptibility genes, and it remains difficult to identify the specific risk alleles because of linkage disequilibrium; certain alleles tend to be co-inherited with other alleles, making it difficult to distinguish between the effects of either on diabetes susceptibility. fine mapping of these regions suggests that the two alleles dqb1 and drb1 are the most important (4). alleles in the dqb1 gene are often tightly associated with alleles in the drb1 gene, and variants of both or either allele may confer an increased risk of diabetes. sequences in the dqb1 gene that code for an amino acid other than aspartic acid at position 57 (non-asp57) are highly associated with type 1 diabetes (5). crystal structures suggest that loss of aspartic acid at this position creates an "oxyanion hole". this may be occupied by the tcell during the interaction between hla and the t- cell receptor (6). the diabetes risk of non-asp57 is further increased when the haplotype also contains the drb1*0401 allele, suggesting the possible existence of at least two separate loci of susceptibility (7). one of the protective hla haplotypes is dqa1*0102, dqb1*0602. approximately 20% of americans and europeans have this haplotype, whereas less than 1% of children with type 1 diabetes do (8). A well-known marker for type 1 diabetes is the presence of islet cell autoantibodies. however, even in the presence of islet cell autoantibodies, the haplotype dq a1*0102, dq b1*0602 has a protective effect. but once the diabetes disease process begins, the mechanism that protected these individuals from diabetes is lost, suggesting that inheriting these alleles does not prevent diabetes but may somehow delay or arrest the progression of the disease (9). insulin is a hormone that has a wide range of effects on metabolism. its overall action is to encourage the body to store energy rather than use it, e.g., insulin favors the storage of glucose as glycogen or fat as opposed to breaking down glucose to release atp. for a summary of the actions of insulin, see the physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation genetic factors in type 1 diabetes. insulin is composed of two distinct polypeptide chains, chain a and chain b, which are linked by disulfide bonds. many proteins that contain subunits, such as hemoglobin, are the products of several genes. however, insulin is the product of one gene, ins. Ins actually encodes an inactive precursor called preproinsulin. preproinsulin is processed into proinsulin by removal of a signaling peptide; however, proinsulin is also inactive. the final processing step involves removal of a c-peptide (a connecting peptide that links chain a to chain b), and this process produces the mature and active form of insulin. molecular information several species, including the rat, mouse, and some species of fish, have two insulin genes. in contrast, in humans there is a single insulin gene that is located on chromosome. it has three exons (coding regions) that span about 2,200 bases. exon 2 encodes the b chain, along with the signal peptide and part of the c-peptide found in the precursors of insulin. exon 3 encodes the a chain and the remainder of the c-peptide. c-peptide is secreted in equal amounts to insulin, but it has long been thought that it has no biological role. however, in diabetic rats c-peptide has been shown to reduce the dysfunction of blood vessels and the nervous system that is common in diabetes (1). c-peptide contains the greatest variation among species, whereas regions of insulin that bind to the insulin receptor are highly conserved. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the ins gene, none (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein (see the allelic variants that are known to be associated with disease). a blast search using human proinsulin precursor as a query finds proteins in 107 different species, which are all metazoans apart from three plants and one bacterium. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. short alleles are associated with a higher risk of developing type 1 diabetes, whereas the longer class alleles are protective. the presence of at least one class allele is associated with a 3-fold reduction in the risk of type 1 diabetes. immature tcells are presented with chains of amino acids, such as insulin, and tcells that form a response to them (and thus are autoreactive) are deleted. because the longer vntrs cause more insulin to be produced in the thymus, the detection and deletion of autoreactive tcells may be more efficient. this improved immune tolerance to insulin would lessen the risk of a future onset of type 1 diabetes caused by anti-insulin antibodies. link roundup for iddm2 live searches diabetes and insulin in pub med pub med central books background information insulin in omimmolecular biology iddm2 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer insulin domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene. location of ins on the human genome. Ins maps to chromosome 11, approximately between 2144 and 2148 kilobases (kb). click on the figure or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ins in the human genome. note: this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome. because the data are recomputed between genome builds, the exact location of ins may fluctuate; therefore, the live web site may not appear exactly. the remaining type 1 diabetes susceptibility loci, iddm3 iddm18, were mainly discovered by genome scan linkage studies, e.g., looking for linkage between regions of the genome and disease in affected sib-pairs. the iddm loci are found on several different chromosomes and contain many genes, many of which have now been identified. some of these genes are suspected to play a role in susceptibility to type 1 diabetes, and they are discussed below. iddm3 no diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm3 locus, which is found on chromosome. iddm4 several potential candidate genes lie near the iddm4 locus on chromosome 11. these include zfm1 (zinc finger protein 162), which encodes a transcription factor found in the pancreas, and fadd (fas-associated death protein). the transmission of the "cell death" signal involves the interaction between fas and fadd, and in type 1 diabetes, the apoptosis of pancreatic beta cells may involve the fadd. apoptosis of the beta cell may be triggered by the binding of fas (expressed on the beta cell) with fas ligand (expressed on the cytotoxic tcell) (1). other candidate genes in this region include lrp5, which encodes a novel transmembrane protein that is similar to receptors belonging to the low-density lipoprotein family (2). iddm5 the region of chromosome 6 that contains the iddm5 locus includes the sod2 gene, which encodes mitochondrial superoxide dismutase. sod2 metabolizes harmful oxygen free radicals, which are intermediates in many biological reactions, and converts them into less reactive and less harmful molecules. there is some evidence that free oxygen radicals may play a role in the destruction of beta cells. enzymes such as sod2 may therefore offer protection against type 1 diabetes, and genetic variants of sod2 may increase susceptibility to disease (1). iddm6 several candidate diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm6 locus. they include a gene associated with colorectal cancer (dcc) that may be linked with autoimmune disease, a gene that encodes a zinc finger dna binding domain (znf236) that may be linked with diabetic kidney disease, and a molecule that opposes apoptosis (bcl-2) (1). iddm7 within the iddm7 locus on chromosome 2 are several candidate diabetes risk genes. one is neurod1 (3), a transcription factor that is expressed widely in the developing brain and pancreas. neurod1 regulates the transcription of the insulin gene, and in addition to its association with type 1 diabetes, variants of this gene have been implicated in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes; a mutation of this gene causes mody6. other genes located within the iddm7 locus include igrp (islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit-related protein), which encodes the beta cell-specific version of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase. Igrph as emerged as a major target of cell-mediated autoimmunity in type 1 diabetes (4). many other candidate genes (interleukin-1 gene cluster, hoxd8, gad1, galnt3) in this region have been investigated but none of these genes have been shown to be associated with type 1 diabetes (1). iddm8 no diabetes susceptibility genes have been identified in the iddm8 locus, which is found on chromosome 6. iddm9 the symbol iddm9 has not yet been approved.genetic factors in type 1 diabetes 23 iddm10 the gene gad2 is closely linked to the region of chromosome designated as iddm10. glutamic acid decarboxylase (gad) catalyzes formation of the neurotransmitter gaba. targeting of this enzyme by autoantibodies has been implicated in the pathogenesis of stiff-man syndrome and type 1 diabetes. both diseases feature insulin deficiency, but stiff-man syndrome also bears the features of an autoimmune attack against the central nervous system, characterized by painful muscle spasms and increasing stiffness of axial muscles. the difference between stiff-man syndrome and type 1 diabetes may be because gadis expressed in two different isoforms: one is expressed in the central nervous system, and the other is in the beta cells (7). the nature of the immune attack against these two isoforms also appears to be different (8). the gad2 gene encodes gad65, and this protein contains a 24-amino acid segment that is similar to an amino acid sequence found in the coxsackie virus, a suspected environmental trigger for the onset of type 1 diabetes. autoimmunity in iddm may thus arise by "molecular mimicry" between gad and a viral polypeptide (9). however, evidence of cross-reactivity has not been demonstrated in immune cells from patients with diabetes. autoantibodies against gad have been found in patients who have had preclinical type 1 diabetes (10). in the type 1 diabetes mouse, the expression of gad by beta cells is required for the development of autoimmune diabetes. complete suppression of beta-cell gad expression blocks the generation of diabetogenic tcells, leading to the theory that modulation of gad might have therapeutic value in type 1 diabetes (11). iddm11 one candidate gene in the iddm11 locus is the ensagene, which encodes alpha-endosulphine. this protein is thought to be an endogenous regulator of the beta cell potassium channel (katp channel). the katp channels co-ordinate a rise in blood glucose with insulin secretion. as glucose levels rise, the corresponding rise in atps huts the channel, leading to a change in membrane polarity. voltage-sensitive calcium channels flip open, allowing ca2+ ions to enter into the beta cells, triggering exocytosis of insulin. the katp channel pore is encoded by the kirgene, and the channel is regulated by the sulfonylurea receptor encoded by the abcc8 gene. recombinant alpha-endosulphine has been shown to inhibit the binding of the diabetes drug sulfonylurea to its receptor, to reduce the flow of k+ through the katp channel, and to stimulate insulin secretion (12). another candidate gene in this region is the sel1 l gene. it is a negative regulator of the notch signalling pathway which controls the differentiation of pancreatic endocrine cells (13). iddm12 several candidate genes have been located in the iddm12 locus, and the strongest candidates encode co- stimulatory receptors on the tcell. when the tcell is presented with a chain of amino acids, its t-cell receptor binds to the hla molecules that are presenting the chains. for the tcell to become fully activated, there is additional signaling between co-stimulatory receptors and corresponding ligands on the antigen-presenting cell. these co-stimulatory receptors are encoded by the candidate genes for type 1 diabetes susceptibility ctla4, cd28, and icos. read more about the role of ctla4 in type 1 diabetes. iddm13 several iddm13 candidate genes have been investigated, but variants of these genes have yet to be associated with type 1 diabetes.24 genetic landscape of diabetes iddm14 the symbol iddm14 has not yet been approved. iddm15 the iddm15 locus has been linked with type diabetes, and mutations near this region are associated with a rare form of diabetes called transient neonatal diabetes (14). iddm16 one of the candidate genes in the iddm16 locus is the immunoglobulin heavy chain. immunoglobulins (antibodies) have a central role in the immune response against foreign antigens and in error can also attack self-antigens, resulting in autoimmune disease. immunoglobulins are known to interact with hla molecules, variants of which are associated with diabetes protection or susceptibility (iddm1 contains the hla genes). immunoglobulins are composed of two heavy chains and two light chains, and the iddm16 locus contains the gene that encodes the heavy chain. genetically controlled differences in the immunoglobulin heavy chain may affect an individual's immune response to self-antigens and thus alter the risk of developing autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes (1). iddm17 the iddm17 locus was discovered to be linked to type 1 diabetes, but the candidate gene(s) is not yet known. the fas gene maps to this genomic area, but it has been excluded as a possible diabetes susceptibility gene. iddm18 acandidate diabetes susceptibility gene in the iddm18 locus is ilb12. this gene encodes a subunit of il-12p40, a signaling molecule secreted by white blood cells. in animal models, il-12 plays an important role in the induction of diabetes. in humans, variation in il-12p40 production may influence the reactivity of tcells and initiate or protect against autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes. an inhibitor of the immune response (ctla4) summary immune cells are continually analyzing small chains of amino acids to detect infectious agents or tumor cells. when a foreign chain is found, the immune cells become activated and begin to attack. the ctla4 gene encodes a molecule that hinders the activation of immune cells. the region of the chromosome that contains ctla4 has been linked with susceptibility to many autoimmune diseases including type 1 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: cytotoxic t-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 official gene symbol: ctla4 alias: cd152 background one of the steps in mounting an immune response involves an interaction between two cells. the first cell, called the antigen-presenting cell (apc), displays small chains of amino acids (antigens) on its surface, and they present these antigens to the second type of cell, tcells. once the tcell has analyzed the antigen, it can either become activated and launch an immune attack or be deactivated. in a healthy immune system, tcells become activated only to foreign antigens, such as fragments from bacteria or viruses. if the tcells become activated in response to self-antigens, autoimmune diseases such as diabetes results. optimal activation of the tcell requires a two-way interaction between the t-cell receptor and the antigen (the first signal) and between co-stimulatory receptors on the surface of the tcell with co-stimulatory ligands expressed by apcs (the second signal). failure of the tcell to receive a second signal can lead to its deactivation. one of the co-stimulatory molecules on the tcell is called cytotoxic tlymphocyte-associated antigen (ctla4). ctla4 has a negative regulatory effect on the immune system because it down-regulates t-cell activation by interfering with the second signal. mice with a targeted disruption of the ctla4 gene develop a fatal disorder characterized by massive lymphocyte proliferation (1). unlike other co-stimulator receptors on the tcell, ctla4 is only expressed when the tcell has been activated after antigen presentation. because it is only expressed in activated tcells, and because it down regulates the function of tcells, it is likely that ctla4 has a role in guarding against autoimmunity (2). loss of this gene may result in activated tcells attacking self-antigens. indeed, genetic variants of ctla4 have been linked with autoimmune disorders such as autoimmune hypothyroid disease, graves' disease (3), systemic lupus erythematosus (sle) (4), celiac disease (5), and type 1 diabetes (6-8). molecular information ctl4 amaps to iddm12 on chromosome 2, and the equivalent area of the mouse genome has been linked to type 1 diabetes in the non-obese diabetic (nod) mouse (9). it has four exons (coding regions) that span around 7,000 bases. the gene encodes a protein of 223 amino acids. the ctla4 protein contains an immunoglobulin v-like domain. a transmembrane region, and a putative cytoplasmic region that is identical to the mouse ctla4 protein. this conservation of the cytoplasmic region between species suggests that it has an important role in the functioning of ctla4 (10). several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the ctla4 gene, two (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein ( figure 2 ). none of these variants have yet to be associated with disease (see known allelic variants ). a blast search using human ctla4 as a query finds proteins in 19 different species, which are all metazoans (multicellular). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. ctla4 and diabetes: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on ctla4 and diabetes, search pub med. there are several snps in the 3' untranslated region of the ctla4 sequence that have been implicated in determining the risk for several common autoimmune disorders, including type 1 diabetes. one of the snps, termed ct60, encodes a genotype that is either protective (a/a) or predisposes (g/g) toward autoimmune disease. the disease susceptibility gallele is common, being found in 50% of individuals without autoimmune disorders, and is more common in individuals with graves' disease (63%). the g/ghaplotype correlated with lower production of the soluble alternative splice from of ctla4 (s ctla4) compared with the protective a/ahaplotype. this reduction of s ctla4 levels could lead to reduced blocking of signals between tcells and apcs, leading to increased activation of tcells. this allele was also associated with type 1 diabetes but the effect was small (11).genetic factors in type 1 diabetes 27 link roundup for ctla4 live searches diabetes and ctla4 in pub med pub med central books background information ctla4 in omimmolecular biology ctla4 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer immunoglobulin v-type domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure . location of ctla4 on the human genome. ctla4 maps to chromosome 2, approximately between 204,930 and 204,945 kilobases (kb). click on the image or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ctla4 in the human genome. note: this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome. because the data are recomputed between genome builds, the exact location of ctla4 may fluctuate. type 2 diabetes has been loosely defined as "adult onset" diabetes, although as diabetes becomes more common throughout the world, cases of type 2 diabetes are being observed in younger people. it is increasingly common in children. in determining the risk of developing diabetes, environmental factors such as food intake and exercise play an important role. the majority of individuals with type 2 diabetes are either overweight or obese. inherited factors are also important, but the genes involved remain poorly defined. in rare forms of diabetes, mutations of one gene can result in disease. however, in type 2 diabetes, many genes are thought to be involved. "diabetes genes" may show only a subtle variation in the gene sequence, and these variations may be extremely common. the difficulty lies in linking such common gene variations, known as single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), with an increased risk of developing diabetes. one method of finding the diabetes susceptibility genes is by whole-genome linkage studies. the entire genome of affected family members is scanned, and the families are followed over several generations and/or large numbers of affected sibling-pairs are studied. associations between parts of the genome and the risk of developing diabetes are looked for. to date only two genes, calpain 10 (capn10) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (hnf4 a), have been identified by this method. the sulfonylurea receptor (abcc8) summary sulfonylureas are a class of drugs used to lower blood glucose in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. these drugs interact with the sulfonylurea receptor of pancreatic beta cells and stimulate insulin release. the sulfonylurea receptor is encoded by the abcc8 gene, and genetic variation of abcc8 may impair the release of insulin. nomenclature official name: atp-binding cassette, sub-family c, member 8 official gene symbol: abcc8 alias: sulfonylurea receptor, sur, sur1 background the protein encoded by the abcc8 gene is a member of the atp-binding cassette transporters. these proteins use energy in the form of atp to drive the transport of various molecules across cell membranes. abcc8 belongs to a subfamily of transporters that contains the chloride channel that is mutated in cystic fibrosis (cftr) and also the proteins that are involved in multi-drug resistance. read more: the human atp-binding cassette (abc) transporter superfamily the abcc8 protein is also known as the sulfonylurea urea receptor (sur). suris one of the proteins that composes the atp-sensitive potassium channel (katp channel) found in the pancreas (1). the other protein, called kir6.2, forms the core of the channel and is encoded by the kcnj11 gene . katp channels play a central role in glucose-induced insulin secretion by linking signals derived from glucose metabolism (a rise in atp) to membrane depolarization (due to katp channels closing) and the secretion of insulin.31 the activity of the katp channel regulates the release of insulin. the sulfonylureas are drugs that can modulate katp channel activity and are used in the treatment of type diabetes. by binding to sur, they inhibit the channel and stimulate the release of insulin. this leads to a lowering of blood glucose levels. the activity of the katp channel is also modulated by the subtype of sur (sur, also known as sur1, is encoded by abcc8; or sur2 a and sur2 b, which are encoded by abcc9). in the pancreas, most katp channels are thought to be a complex of four sur1 proteins and four kir6.2 proteins. mutations in either abcc8 or kcnj11 can result in up-regulated insulin secretion, a condition termed familial persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (phhi) (2-4). genetic variation in abcc8 has also been implicated in the impaired release of insulin that is seen in type 2 diabetes. molecular information abc genes are found in many different eukaryotic species and are highly conserved between species, indicating that many of these genes existed early in eukaryotic evolution. A blast search using human abcc8 as a query finds proteins in 30 different species, which include multicellular organisms (metazoans), fungi, and plants. potential true homologous genes have been identified in the mouse and rat. by fluorescence in situ hybridization, it was found that the abbc8 gene maps to the short arm of chromosome 11. it has 41 exons (coding regions) that span over 84,000 bases. the abc transporter proteins, such as abcc8, typically contain two atp-binding domains and two transmembrane domains. the atp-binding domains are also known as nucleotide binding folds (nbfs), and mutations in either nbf1 or nbf2 can lead to phi. this suggests that both nbfregions of the surare needed for the normal regulation of katpchannel activity. as found in all proteins that bind atp, the nucleotide binding domains of the abcfamily of proteins contain characteristic motifs called walker aand b. the walker amotif contains a lysine residue that is critical for activating the katpchannel. when this lysine residue is mutated in nbf1, but not nbf2, the katpchannel can no longer be activated. in addition, abc genes also contain a signature c motif. the transmembrane domains contain 611 membrane spanning helices, and the abc c protein contains 6. these helices provide the protein with specificity for the molecule they transport across the membrane. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the abc c8 gene. usually snps linked with disease occur within the coding regions (exons) of the genes, and they result in a non-synonymous amino acid change. in abcc8, there are seven such snps (at the time of writing) that cause a switch of amino acids in the mature protein. however, one of the snps of the abc c8 gene that has been linked with diabetes (r1273 r) does not cause an amino acid change (see below). abc c8 and diabetes: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on abcc8 and diabetes, search pub med . the two genes that encode the katpchannel, abbc8 and kcnj11, reside adjacent to one another on chromosome 11. a variant of abcc8, called a1369 s, is in almost complete linkage disequilibrium with a variant of kcnj11 called e23 k. this means that from the genetic evidence, it is difficult to determine whether it is the a1369 s variant or the e23 k variant that predisposes to type 2 diabetes. a mutation in abc c8 was observed to cause an extremely rare form of diabetes, autosomal dominant diabetes, in a finnish family. the switch of glutamate to lysine at residue 1506 (e1506 k) in the sur1 protein caused a 32 genetic landscape of diabetes congenital hyperinsulinemia. the mutation reduced the activity of katp channels, increasing insulin secretion. by early adulthood, the ability of the beta cells to secrete adequate amounts of insulin was exhausted, leading to diabetes. A silent variant in exon 31 of the abc c8 gene has been associated with high concentrations of insulin in non- diabetic mexican americans. the codon agg is mutated to aga, but this still codes for the residue arginine (r1273 r). the normal and mutant alleles were called g and a, respectively. among non-diabetics, those who were homozygous for the mutant allele (aa genotype) had higher levels of insulin when fasting, compared with heterozygotes (ag) and normal wild-type (gg). because type 2 diabetes is more common in mexican americans than in the general us population, it has been proposed that individuals with the aa genotype are at a higher risk of diabetes because of an over-secretion of insulin. two common polymorphisms of the abcc8 gene (exon 16-3t/c and exon 18 t/c) have been variably associated with type 2 diabetes. however, a recent large case control study in britain revealed that these abcc8 variants did not appear to be associated with diabetes. location of abc c8 on the human genome. abc c8 maps to chromosome 11, approximately between 17,370 and 17,470 kilobases (kb). click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of abc c8 in the human genome. note: this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome. because the data are recomputed between genome builds, the exact location of abcc8 may fluctuate. the live web site may, therefore, not appear exactly. the calpain 10 enzyme (capn10) summary calpain 10 is a calcium-activated enzyme that breaks down proteins. variation in the non-coding region of the capn10 gene is associated with a threefold increased risk of type 2 diabetes in mexican americans. A genetic variant of capn10 may alter insulin secretion, insulin action, and the production of glucose by the liver. nomenclature official gene name: calpain 10 official gene symbol: capn10 alias: calcium-activated neutral protease genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 35 background the discovery of capn10 marks the first time that screening the entire genome led to the identification of a gene linked to a common and genetically complex disease such as type diabetes. in 1996, a link was made between a region of chromosome 2 and an increased risk of diabetes in mexican americans in texas, usa. the region on the chromosome, located near the end of the long arm of chromosome 2, was named niddm1 (non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 1). to pinpoint a gene that conferred risk, new statistical techniques were used, and the region was sequenced in greater and greater detail. four years later, a new diabetes susceptibility gene, capn10, was discovered. the new gene encoded the enzyme calpain 10, a member of the calpain family of cysteine proteases. these enzymes are activated by calcium and regulate the functions of other proteins by cleaving pieces off, leaving the altered protein either more or less active. in this way, they regulate biochemical pathways and are involved in intracellular signaling pathways, cell proliferation, and differentiation. for a detailed description of the action of cysteine proteases, visit stryer's biochemistry calpains are found in all human cells, and 14 members of the calpain family are now known, many of which are associated with human disease. calpains 1 and 2 are implicated in causing injury to the brain after a stroke and also have been linked to the pathology seen in alzheimer's disease. calpain 3 is mainly found in the muscle, and mutations cause limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. mutations of calpains in the worm caenorhabditis elegans affect sexual development, and mutations of a calpain-like gene in the fly cause a degeneration of parts of the nervous system. calpain 10 was an unexpected find in the search for a putative diabetes susceptibility gene. its link with diabetes is complex; susceptibility is not attributable to a single variation but to several variations of dna that interact to either increase, decrease, or have no effect on the risk of developing diabetes. in mexican americans, it is thought that the highest risk combination of these variations results in a population-attributable risk of 14%, i.e., 14% of mexican americans who have diabetes would not have diabetes if they did not have the high-risk genetic variant capn10. calpain 10 is an atypical member of the calpain family, and its biological role is unknown. because capn10 m rna is expressed in the pancreas, muscle, and liver, its role in diabetes may involve insulin secretion, insulin action, and the production of glucose by the liver. molecular information calpains are found in all human cells and are found throughout the animal kingdom. a blast search using human capn10 as a query finds proteins in 18 different species, all of which are multicellular organisms (metazoans). however, potential true homologous genes have been identified only in the mouse. the calpains consist of a large catalytic subunit and a small regulatory subunit. the large subunit contains four domains (iiv), and the catalytic center of the cysteine protease is located in domain ii. domain I is the n- terminal domain that is processed when the enzyme is activated, domain iii is a linker domain, and the c- terminal domain iv binds calcium and resembles the calcium-binding protein, calmodulin. domain iv also has characteristic ef-hand motifs. calpain 10 is an atypical calpain in that it lacks the calmodulin-like domain iv and instead has a divergent c- terminal domain, domain t. calpains 5 and 6 also have a domain t, and together they form a subfamily of calpains. the capn10 has 13 exons (coding regions) that span about 30,000 bases. alternate splicing of the gene creates at least eight transcripts (named isoform a through isoform h), which in turn encode proteins ranging from 138 to 672 amino acids in length. calpain isoform a is the most abundant iso form. it lacks exons 8, 14, and 15 but remains the longest transcript and encodes a protein of 672 amino acids that is found in all tissues, with the highest levels being found in the heart. although the structure of capn10 has not yet been solved, mapping the capn10 sequence to the crystal structure of human m-caplain (also known as calpain 2 or capn2) gives a good estimate of structure. the domains span from residues 1672. many single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the capn10 gene. a surprise finding was that the snps linked with type 2 diabetes in the mexican americans were located in the non-coding regions (introns) of the gene. usually, snps linked with disease occur within the coding regions (exons) of the genes, and they result in a non-synonymous amino acid change. in calpain isoform a, there are four such snps (at the time of writing) that cause a switch of amino acids in the mature protein. however, the snps of the capn10 gene that have been linked with diabetes are located in introns (introns 3, 6, and 19), and because introns are not transcribed, they do not directly cause an amino acid change. instead, it is proposed that snps in capn10 introns may alter risk by affecting the transciptional regulation of calpain 10. over 10% of mexican americans are affected by type 2 diabetes. by studying generations of mexican americans in star county, texas, it was found that snps in introns of the calpain 10 gene were associated with an increased susceptibility to diabetes. intron 3 of the capn10 gene contained snp-43 (also called ucsnp-43 for university of chicago snp-43) in which adenine had been switched to guanine. the high-risk genotype is snp-43 g/g. snps were also found in intron 6 (snp-19) and intron 13 (snp-63). together, these three snps interact to affect the risk of diabetes. with two different versions of the gene at three distinct sites, there are eight possible combinations, but only four combinations of alleles are commonly found. at each snpsite, the allele was labeled "1" and "2". the most common combination in mexican americans was 112 on one chromosome and 121 on the other. this 112/121 combination was associated with a three-fold increased risk of diabetes. the high-risk combination also increased the risk of developing diabetes in northern europeans, but because the at-risk genotype is less common, it has less of a role in determining susceptibility in europeans. the genotype 112/111 had no effect on the risk of developing diabetes, and the 112/221 combination actually decreased the risk. similar to the mexican americans, the pima indians of arizona have a high prevalence of type 2 diabetes. however, in a study among the pima indians, no association was found between the high-risk genotype snp-43 g/gand an increased prevalence of diabetes, although g/gindividuals did have reduced expression of capn10 m rnaand showed signs of insulin resistance, which may increase susceptibility to diabetes. in europe, capn10 appears to contribute less to type 2 diabetes. in britain, there was no association between snp-43, snp-19, and snp-63 and diabetes, but it is possible that snps at other sites in the calpain gene may increase the type 2 diabetes risk. in a large study in scandinavians, no association was found between these three snps and diabetes. in asia, genetic variation in capn10 did not contribute to diabetes in japan or in the samoans of polynesia, although variations of capn10 may play a role in the risk of diabetes in the Chinese. the biological function of calpain has remained unknown for several years; however, a recent study suggests that calpain 10 may have a critical role in beta cell survival. there are several intracellular stores of calcium; one of these stores contains calcium channels that are sensitive to ryanodine (ry r2). in the beta cell, blocking ry r2 initiates a newly discovered pathway that activates capn10 and triggers cell death. link roundup for capn10 live searches diabetes and capn10 in pub med pub med central books background information calpain 10 in omimmolecular biology calpain 10 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer domains snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure 1. location of capn10 on the human genome. capn10 maps to chromosome 2, approximately between 241,840 and 241,880 kilobases (kb). click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of capn10 in the human genome. note: this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome. because the data are recomputed between genome builds, the exact location of capn10 may fluctuate. the live web site may, therefore, not appear exactly. the glucagon receptor (gcgr) summary glucagon is a key hormone in the regulation of glucose levels. as such, the gcgr gene which encodes its receptor is a candidate diabetes susceptibility gene. a mutant glucagon receptor has been associated with diabetes. background glucagon, like insulin, is a peptide hormone that is secreted by the pancreas. unlike insulin, glucagon acts to promote the mobilization of fuels, particularly glucose. see figure 1 for a summary of the actions of insulin and glucagon on their three main target tissues, the liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. glucagon acts on the liver to stimulate glucose production, either from the breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis) or by the fresh production of glucose from the carbon skeletons of amino acids (glucogenogenesis). in addition to raising blood glucose levels, glucagon also stimulates the formation of ketone bodies. glucagon does this by stimulating the release of free fatty acids (ffas) from adipose tissue, and when these enter the liver, glucagon directs their metabolic fate. instead of being used to make triglycerides (a storage form of lipid), the ffas are shunted toward beta-oxidation and the formation of ketoacids, which can be used by several organs as an alternative fuel to glucose. the glucagon receptor is a member of the 7-transmembrane receptor (7 tm) family. these receptors have also been called the serpentine receptors because of the way the single polypeptide chain of the receptor "snakes" back and forth across the cell membrane. this diverse family of receptors not only responds to hormones such as glucagon but also transmits many other signals including light, smell, and neurotransmitters. read more about 7 tm receptors in stryer's biochemistry . when glucagon outside of the cell binds to the glucagon receptor, it induces a conformational change in the receptor that can be detected inside the cell. the activated receptor stimulates intracellular c amp production, which in turn stimulates protein kinase a(pka) to phosphorylate many target proteins, including two enzymes that lead to the breakdown of glycogen and inhibit further glycogen synthesis. molecular information the gcgr gene maps to chromosome 17. it has 14 exons (coding regions) that span around 10,700 bases. the 7 tm receptor encoded by this gene is also known as a g protein coupled 40 genetic landscape of diabetes receptor because a g protein (guanyl nucleotide-binding protein) conveys an intermediate step in signal transduction. in the unactivated state, the g protein coupled to the glucagon receptor exists as a heterotrimer consisting of , , and subunits. the subunit (g) binds gdp. many different g proteins exist, and for the glucagon receptor, because the activated g subunit stimulates adenylate cyclase, the receptor is classified as a gs receptor ("s" for stimulatory effect of the subunit). binding of glucagon initiates the exchange of gs-bound gdp for gtp. the g protein then dissociates into gand a gdimer; the latter transmits the signal that the receptor has bound its ligand. a single glucagon receptor can activate many g proteins, leading to a greatly amplified signal. the signal from an occupied glucagon receptor is "switched off" when the g hydrolyzes the bound gtp back to gdp, and the gdp-bound g can now reassociate with g to reform the heterotrimeric protein. A blast search using human gcgr as a query finds proteins in different species, which are all metazoans (multicellular organisms). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse, rat, and fruit fly. Gcgr and diabetes: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on gcgr and diabetes. the enzyme glucokinase (gck) summary glucokinase, encoded by the gckgene speeds up glucose metabolism and acts as a "glucose sensor" in the beta cell. mutant glucokinase causes a rare form of diabetes and may also play a role in type 2 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: glucokinase official gene symbol: gckalias: gk, hexokinase iv, hk4, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 2, mody2 background the enzyme glucokinase catalyzes glucose metabolism in the liver and in the pancreatic beta cell. glucokinase traps glucose inside the cell by catalyzing its phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate. this is the first and rate-limiting step in glycosis, a pathway that produces energy in the form of atp from glucose. glucokinase (also called hexokinase iv) differs from the other hexokinases that are found in other tissues. first, glucokinase has a lower affinity for glucose. this allows other organs such as the brain and muscles to have first call on glucose when their supply is limited. A second feature is that glucokinase is not inhibited by its product, glucose-6-phosphate. this lack of negative feedback inhibition enables hepatic glucokinase to remain active 42 genetic landscape of diabetes while glucose is abundant, ensuring that the liver can continue removing glucose from the blood ensuring that no glucose goes to waste. glucokinase is proposed to be an important "glucose sensor" in the following way. the rate of glucose metabolism is determined by the rate of glucose phosphorylation, which is catalyzed by glucokinase in the liver and pancreas. the liver and pancreas also express glucose transporter (glut2), an insulin-independent cellular protein that mediates the transport of glucose into cells. the capacity of glut2 to transport glucose is very high, facilitating rapid equilibrium between extracellular and intracellular glucose. thus, in effect, the extracellular glucose concentrations are sensed by glucokinase. by catalyzing the rate-limiting step of glucose metabolism in the liver, glucokinase enables the liver to buffer the rise in glucose that takes place after a meal. in the pancreas, glucokinase is the glucose sensor for insulin release. the threshold for glucose-stimulated insulin release is about 5 mmol/l. mutations of gck that alter this threshold manifest as three different syndromes and highlight the importance of gck in glucose homeostasis and diabetes: 1.activating mutations lower the beta cell threshold for insulin release to as low as 1.5 mmol/l of glucose, leading to an increase in insulin release. this manifests as persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (phhi). 2.inactivating mutations raise the beta cell threshold for insulin release. if two alleles altered by inactivating mutations are inherited, the level of glucose needed to stimulate insulin release from the pancreas is extremely high. affected individuals present with diabetes at birth (permanent neonatal diabetes). 3.maturity onset diabetes in the young, type 2 (mody2) is caused by inheriting one allele that has been altered by an inactivating mutation. this partial inactivation leads to an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin release to about 7 mmol/l. this causes a mild hyperglycemia that is present at birth but often is only detected in later life. because of its role as a glucose sensor, gck is a candidate susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes. molecular information the hexokinase family consists of several enzymes that are all evolutionarily related. in vertebrates, there are four hexokinases named ito iv. glucokinase is a distinct member of this family. a blast search using human gck as a query finds proteins in 46 different species, which range from metazoa (multicellular organisms), fungi, plants, and other eukaryotes. potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse, rat, fly, mosquito, nematode worm, and the plant, mouse-ear cress. the gck gene maps to chromosome 7. it has 12 exons (coding regions) that span around 46,000 bases. there are three gck transcript variants that differ in their first exon, and their expression is tissue specific. one isoform predominates in the pancreatic beta cells; the other two isoforms are found in the liver. the glucokinase enzyme is found in the outer membrane compartment of mitochondria in these tissues. these mutations are all clustered in one area of the glucokinase structure that is remote from the substrate binding site, and this region has been termed the allosteric activator site. because naturally occurring mutations at this site are associated with an increase in insulin release, the search began for pharmacological allosteric activators that could increase gck activity, increase the release of insulin, and be used in the treatment of diabetes. the metabolic changes that take place in type diabetes include impaired insulin secretion from the pancreas and increased glucose production by the liver. in turn, studies of gluckokinase activators (gkas) appear to show a dual mechanism of action: they increase the release of insulin from the pancreas and stimulate the use of glucose in the liver, thus making gkas ideal candidates for diabetes therapy. the glucose transporter glut2 summary the glut2 gene encodes a glucose transporter which regulates the entry of glucose into pancreatic beta cells and is thought to be a "glucose sensor". mutations of glut2 cause a rare genetic syndrome that disrupts blood glucose regulation. common variants of glut2 may be linked with type 2 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: solute carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose transporter), member 2 official gene symbol: slc2 a2 alias: glucose transporter 2, glut2 background the family of glucose transporter proteins transports glucose across plasma membranes. the proteins are facilitative transporters carrying glucose across membranes without requiring energy. each member of the family has its own specialized function and tissue distribution. for a summary of the family of glucose transporters, named glut1 to glut5, read stryer's biochemistry . beta cells in the pancreas express glut2. the transporter has a low affinity for glucose, requiring a high concentration of glucose to achieve half its maximal rate of transport (high km). this enables the beta cell to only begin the insulin secretion cascade during times of plenty. by regulating the entry of glucose into the beta cell, it has been proposed that glut2 is an important "glucose sensor". glut2 is also found in the liver and transports glucose both into and out of liver cells. it allows the liver to buffer changes in glucose concentration after a meal. glut2 has a high capacity for glucose, so once the glucose levels have risen, the liver can quickly remove large amounts of glucose from the blood into the liver cells. genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 45 mutations in the gene that encodes glut2, called slc2 a2, cause an extremely rare genetic syndrome called fanconi-bickel syndrome (fbs) ( ). Fbs was named for the scientists who first described the condition in 1949, and since then over 100 cases have been observed. affected individuals may exhibit hyperglycemia in the fed state and/or hypoglycemia during fasting. hyperglycemia in fbs may involve inappropriate glucose uptake into the liver and this hyperglycemia could be further enhanced by inappropriate insulin secretion by the pancreas. the rise in liver intracellular glucose may inhibit the breakdown of glycogen, leading to low levels of glucose in the blood and increased levels of glycogen stored in the liver. A transport defect of the kidneys also leads to the loss of glucose in the urine which further worsens the hypoglycemia. whereas mutations of slc2 a2 cause a rare genetic syndrome that disrupts glucose regulation, it is possible that variations of this gene may also be involved in type 2 diabetes, a common form of diabetes. molecular information the glut2 gene maps to chromosome 3. it has 11 exons (coding regions) that span about 31,400 bases. members of the glucose transporter family each consist of a single polypeptide of about 500 residues long. this peptide crosses the membrane several times, and there are typically 12 transmembrane segments. the translocation of glucose across the membrane is thought to involve inward-facing and outward-facing glucose binding sites that are located in transmembrane segments 9, 10, and 11 of the glutprotein. mutations of these regions severely impair glucose transport (4-6). A highly conservered motif, (r)xgrr, is found not only in the facilitative glucose transporters but also in the sugar transport superfamily. mutations that disrupt this conserved sequence result in the fanconi-bickel syndrome. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the glut2 gene, four (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein. one of these variants (t110 i) may be associated with type 2 diabetes status, and different variants have been associated with the fanconi-bickel syndrome (view known allelic variants). the problem of fuel transport appears to have been solved early in evolutionary terms. a blast search using human slc2 a2 as a query finds proteins in 55 different species that include sugar transporters in organisms as diverse as bacteria, fungi, plants, and multicellular species (metazoa). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. slc2 a2 is a likely candidate gene for type 2 diabetes because it is a high km transporter that regulates entry of glucose in the pancreatic beta cell and triggers insulin secretion. in one diabetic patient, a mutation that disrupts a highly conserved valine in the 5th membrane spanning domain of glut2 was found. the valine at position 197 was switched to an isoleucine residue (v197 i). expression of this mutant protein in xenopus oocytes abolished the transporter activity of glut2, suggesting that defects in glut2 may have a causative role in the development of diabetes. many studies have been unsuccessful in finding evidence of association between snps in the slc2 a2 gene and type 2 diabetes. one snp that may be significant is a threonine to isoleucine switch at residue 110 (t110 i), which occurs in the second membrane spanning domain of glut2. this snpis present equally in 46 genetic landscape of diabetes diabetics and non-diabetics, but in one additional study a modest association between the t110 ivariant and type 2 diabetes was observed. the functional role of this polymorphism remains unclear as the variant protein appears to have similar levels of expression and does not seem to disrupt glucose transporter activity. the hnf4 a gene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas. because hnf4 a maps to a region of chromosome 20 that is linked with type 2 diabetes and because mutations of this gene cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes, the hnf4 a gene is considered to be a strong candidate for involvement in type 2 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha official gene symbol: hnf4 a alias: transcription factor 14, tcf14 background the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver is regulated by the transcription factor hnf4 a (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha). many functions that the liver carries out may appear and disappear, depending on 48 genetic landscape of diabetes whether hnf4 ais expressed. in addition, hnf4 a controls the expression of another transcription factor; hepatocyte nuclear factor (hnf1 a), which in turn regulates the expression of several important genes in the liver. as the name suggests, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 is found in abundance in the liver, but it is also found in the beta cells of the pancreas, the kidneys, and intestines. together with other transcription factors such as hnf1 a and hnf1 b(encoded by tcf1 and tcf2, respectively), they make up part of a network of transcription factors that function together to control gene expression in the developing embryo. in particular, hnf4 a is thought to play an important role in the development of the liver, kidney, and intestines. in pancreatic beta cells, this network of transcription factors regulates the expression of the insulin gene. in addition, hnf4 and hnf1 regulate the expression of several other genes linked with insulin secretion, e.g., genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport and glucose metabolism. mutations of hnf4 a can cause an extremely rare form of diabetes, maturity onset diabetes in the young (mody). whereas type 2 diabetes is a disorder usually of late onset with significant genetic basis, mody by definition occurs in the young (onset at age less than 25 years) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. patients with mody caused by hnf4 a mutations exhibit a normal response to insulin (they are not insulin resistant) but do show an impaired response to secreting insulin in the presence of glucose. over time, the amount of insulin secreted decreases, leading to diabetes. affected individuals are usually treated with oral hypoglycemic agents, but up to 40% of patients may require insulin. this form of diabetes is extremely rare and has only been identified in 13 families. the hnf4 a gene is suspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes. because a mutation of this gene causes a rare form of diabetes and because the gene maps to an area of chromosome 20 that has been linked with type 2 diabetes, it is speculated that particular hnf4  a haplotypes may be associated with altered insulin secretion. molecular information hepatocyte nuclear factors (hnfs) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation and metabolism. hnf4 ais an orphan receptor; the ligand(s) that binds to this receptor is unknown. a blast search using human hnf4 a as a query finds proteins in 47 different species, which are all multicellular species (metazoans). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse, rat, and nematode worm. the hnf4 agene maps to chromosome 20. it has 11 exons (coding regions) that span over 30,000 bases. there are at least three different transcript variants of this gene, which encode three different protein isoforms (a, b, and c). the longest m rna transcript, nm000457, encodes the longest hnf4 a protein (isoform b), containing over 450 amino acids. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the hnf4 agene. at the time of writing, three non-synonymous amino acid changes caused by snps have been observed in the longest protein isoform (isoform b). at present, none of these snps have been associated with either type 2 diabetes or mody (see known allelic variants). however, several snps upstream of the coding region have been associated with both modyand type 2 diabetes. it has been proposed that the pancreatic beta cell is sensitive to the amount of hnf4 a present. a variety of nonsense and missense mutations in hnf4 a cause mody, where a decline in insulin secretion occurs. similarly, snps of the gene may have an impact on the beta cell function, increasing or decreasing insulin secretion. in one british study, a haplotype that was linked with reduced disease risk was identified (5). individuals with the "reduced risk" haplotype were significantly associated with increased insulin secretion. these individuals also showed a trend toward lower fasting glucose levels and 2-hour plasma glucose levels. this finding led to the speculation that a particular hnf4 a haplotype might be associated with increased insulin secretion capacity and protection against diabetes. genetic variants associated with increased diabetes risk have been identified upstream of the hnf4 a coding region, in a recently discovered alternative promoter called p2. p2 lies 46 kb upstream of the p1 promoter, and while both promoters are involved in the transcription of hnf4 a, they seem to have different roles in different cells. transcripts from both p1 and p2 have been found in the pancreas, but the p2 promoter is thought to be the primary transcription site in the beta cells and a mutation of p2 is a cause of mody. in the search for genetic variation near the hnf4 a gene, two studies, one of the ashkenazi jew population, and the other of the finnish population ( 8), identified four snps that were associated with type 2 diabetes. these snps (named rs4810424, rs1884613, rs1884614, and rs2144908) flanked the p2 promoter and were associated figure 1. location of hnf4 aon the human genome. hnf4 a maps to chromosome 20, approximately between 43,700 and 43,750 kilobases (kb). click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of hnf4 a in the human genome. note: this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome. because the data are recomputed between genome builds, the exact location of hnf4 a may fluctuate. therefore, the live web site may not appear exactly as in this figure.50 genetic landscape of diabetes with type diabetes risk in both study populations, and the risk of diabetes attributed to each snp was very similar between the two populations. the mechanism by which snps near and in the hnf4 agene increases the risk of diabetes is not yet known. perhaps because many hnf transcription factors can bind directly to the p2 promoter, any alteration of the binding sites for these factors could disrupt the regulation of hnf4 a expression. whereas both p1 and p2 promoters are used in liver cells, mainly p2 is used in pancreas cells, leading to snps affecting the p2 promoter disproportionately affecting hnf4 a expression in the pancreas, in turn leading to beta cell malfunction and diabetes. the insulin hormone (ins) summary the ins gene encodes the precursor to the hormone insulin. genetic variations of the insulin gene (variable number tandem repeats and snps) may play a role in susceptibility to type 1 and type 2 diabetes. background insulin is a hormone that has a wide range of effects on metabolism. its overall action is to encourage the body to store energy rather than use it, e.g., insulin favors the storage of glucose as glycogen or fat as opposed to breaking down glucose to release atp. for a summary of the actions of insulin, see the physiology and biochemistry of sugar regulation. insulin is composed of two distinct polypeptide chains, chain a and chain b, which are linked by disulfide bonds. many proteins that contain subunits, such as hemoglobin, are the products of several genes. however, insulin is the product of one gene, ins.52 genetic landscape of diabetes ins actually encodes an inactive precursor called preproinsulin. preproinsulin is processed into proinsulin by removal of a signaling peptide; however, proinsulin is also inactive. the final processing step involves removal of a c-peptide (a connecting peptide that links chain a to chain b), and this process produces the mature and active form of insulin. for further information, see the story of insulin. molecular information several species, including the rat, mouse, and some species of fish, have two insulin genes. in contrast, in humans there is a single insulin gene that is located on chromosome. it has three exons (coding regions) that span about 2,200 bases. exon 2 encodes the b chain, along with the signal peptide and part of the c-peptide found in the insulin precursors. exon 3 encodes the a chain and the remainder of the c-peptide. c-peptide is secreted in equal amounts to insulin, but it has long been thought that it has no biological role. however, in diabetic rats c-peptide has been shown to reduce the dysfunction of blood vessels and the nervous system that is common in diabetes. c-peptide contains the greatest variation among species, whereas regions of insulin that bind to the insulin receptor are highly conserved. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the ins gene, none (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein (see the allelic variants that are known to be associated with disease). a blast search using the human proinsulin precursor as a query finds proteins in 107 different species, which are all metazoans apart from three plants and one bacterium. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. the gene contains a variable number of tandem repeats, and it has been proposed that the number of repeats may have an impact on birth weight and diabetes susceptibility. in one study, a dna variant in the 3' untranslated region of the ins gene was associated with type 2 diabetes risk. certain mutations of the insulin gene can result in a rare form of diabetes. one form of mutant insulin, called chicago insulin, has been found in individuals who have diabetes that resembles mody. this form of diabetes is rare; it is caused by a single gene (is monogenic) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. mutations of insulin affecting the phenylalanine amino acid at position 24 or 25 of the b chain (b24 or b25) are associated with diabetes. in chicago insulin, b25 is mutated to leucine, or b24 is mutated to serine. the phenylalanine at position 24 is highly conserved, and in crystal structures of insulin, the aromatic ring of this amino acid is important in anchoring the region of the insulin that binds to the insulin receptor. point mutations of ins can also result in increased levels of proinsulin (proinsulinemia). a switch from arginine to histidine at amino acid position 65 results in proinsulinemia, when it is probable that the mutation of arginine 65 disrupts the site at which the c-peptide is cleaved by beta cell proteases to produce insulin from proinsulin. this mutation does not appear to impair glucose tolerance in heterozygous carriers. other point mutations of arginine 65 have been found in individuals with type 2 diabetes and a raised level of insulin and/or proinsulin. however, one of the individuals had a arg65 pro mutation that was not genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 53 thought to be linked to their diabetes, because the mutation was present in a non-diabetic daughter and absent in a daughter who had had gestational diabete. location of ins on the human genome. ins maps to chromosome 11, approximately between 2,144 and 2,148 kilobases (kb). the insulin receptor (insr) summary the insr gene encodes the receptor for insulin. mutations of the insulin receptor can cause rare forms of diabetes and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. background some receptors found on the surfaces of cells are directly linked to enzymes located inside the cell. the insulin receptor belongs to the largest family of such enzyme-linked receptors, known as the receptor protein-tyrosine kinase (rtk) family. more than 50 rtks have been identified, and they share a common structure: an n-terminal extracellular domain containing a ligand-binding site, a single transmembrane helix, and a c-terminal cytosolic domain with protein-tyrosine kinase activity. receptor tyrosine kinases in molecular cell biology most of the rtks consist of single polypeptides, and in response to ligand binding, they dimerize. an exception is the insulin receptor that exists as a dimer in the absence of its ligand. after the ligand has bound to and activated its receptor, the tyrosine kinase activity of the cystolic domain of the rtk is activated. each kinase genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 55 phosphorylates specific tyrosine residues in the cytosolic domain of its dimer partner, a process termed autophosphorylation. autophosphorylation occurs in two stages. first, tyrosine residues near the catalytic site are phosphorylated. in the insulin receptor, this results in a conformational change that permits atp binding, and it may also increase the receptor protein kinase activity. the receptor kinase then phosphorylates other tyrosine residues outside the catalytic domain, creating phosphotyrosine residues that serve as docking ports for additional proteins that transmit intracellular signals downstream of the activated receptors. read more on the signal pathways initiated by insulin binding in molecular cell biology one important docking protein in the insulin receptor is irs1 (insulin receptor substrate). irs1 binds to the phosphotyrosine residues in activated receptors via its src homology 2 (sh2) domains. binding of insulin to its receptor can initiate two distinct signaling pathways: one that includes ras, and one that does not. the initiation of both pathways appears to involve irs1. molecular information the insulin receptor is a dimer, consisting of two polypeptide chains that are linked by disulfide bonds. each polypeptide contains an alpha subunit (extracellular) and a beta sub-unit (transmembrane and intracellular). the alpha and beta subunits are encoded by a single gene, insr, which maps to chromosome 19. it has 23 exons (coding regions) that span about 180,000 bases. the insr gene encodes a precursor that starts with an 27-amino acid signal sequence, followed by the receptor alpha subunit, the cleavage site of the processing enzyme, and the receptor beta subunit. depending upon where the insulin receptor is expressed, there are differences in its composition. the alpha subunit found in insr in the liver differs from its form in muscle and adipose tissue in terms of molecular weight, carbohydrate composition, and antigenicity. the level of activity of its tyrosine kinase may also differ, depending on the tissue in which the receptor is expressed. the mechanism underlying receptor heterogeneity is unknown. alternative splicing of exon 11 of the insr gene generates two insulin receptor isoforms, insr type a (without exon 11) and insr type b (with exon 11). these two transcripts are expressed in a highly regulated fashion and predominate in different tissues. there is evidence that selectivity in the action of insulin may be brought about by the two insr isoforms. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the insr gene, one (at the time of writing) of which causes non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein. this protein variant has not been associated with observed cases of disease. a blast search using human insr as a query finds proteins in 42 different species, which are all metazoans apart from two viruses. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse, rat, and mosquito. Insr and diabetes: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on insr and diabetes, search pub med . mutations in insr lead to a variety of rare clinical syndromes ranging in severity from leprechaunism (usually fatal within the first 2 years of life), rabson-mendenhall syndrome (survival into the second decade), and type ainsulin resistance (survival into middle age and beyond).56 genetic landscape of diabetes resistance to insulin is one of the characteristics of type diabetes. however, most diabetics have a normal sequence of the insulin receptor, indicating that if insulin receptor mutations contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes, they will be present only in a minor fraction of the diabetic population. several variants of the insulin receptor have been associated with hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes. a heterozygous mutation changing val-985 into methionine has been found to be more common in type 2 diabetics than in controls; the relative risk for diabetes was over 4% for met-985 carriers. the prevalence of the mutation increased with increasing serum glucose levels, suggesting a role for this receptor variant in hyperglycemia. potassium channels in the beta cells of the pancreas triggers the release of insulin. drugs that close the channel are used in the treatment of diabetes. variation of the kcnj11 gene which encodes this channel has been linked to both increased and decreased insulin release. nomenclature official gene name: potassium inwardly-rectifying channel, subfamily j, member official gene symbol: kcnj11 alias: inwardly rectifying potassium channel, kir6.2; beta-cell inward rectifie r subunit, bir; atp-sensitive inward rectifier potassium channel 11, ikatp background similar to all cells, pancreatic beta cells maintain a concentration gradient of electolytes (e.g., potassium, sodium, and calcium) across their membranes. ion pumps create the gradient by pushing sodium (na+) out of cells and potassium (k+) into cells. this produces a membrane polarity; the inner side of the membrane has a negative charge of around -70 m v. to maintain the membrane potential and to be able to alter it, specific proteins called ion channels span the membrane and regulate the passage of ions. the release of insulin is controlled by ion channels that conduct k+ and are sensitive to atp (katpchannels). arise in glucose and the corresponding rise in atp shuts the katp channels, which increases the membrane potential to -40 m v. this state, known as depolarization, opens calcium channels, and the entry of ca2+ into the cell triggers the secretion of insulin. drugs (e.g., sulfonylureas) that close beta cell katpchannels are used to treat type 2 diabetes. they are referred to as "oral hypoglycemic agents" because they are taken by mouth and stimulate the release of insulin, which lowers blood sugar levels. the katp channel consists of two types of sub-unit: a k+-channel subunit (termed kir6.2), and a sulfonylurea receptor subunit (sur), which is a member of the family of atp-binding cassette (abc) transporter proteins. the potassium channel is made from four kir6.2 subunits and four sursubunits. the kir6.2 subunit is encoded by the kcnj11 gene. the four kir6. 2 subunits form the pore of the channel through which k+ passes and also contains the atp-binding sites. the abcc8 gene encodes the sursubunit. the four sursubunits modulate the activity of the channel and contain the binding site of the sulfonylurea drugs. mutations in either kcnj11 or abbc8 can reduce katpchannel activity, leading to increased insulin release and low blood sugar levels, a rare disorder called persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (phhi). in contrast, mice that have targeted overactivity of the katp channel have severe diabetes, and in humans, activating mutations of kcnj11 cause permanent neonatal diabetes. molecular information the kcnj11 gene maps to chromosome 11. it has only one exon (coding region) that spans about 2000 bases (2 kilobases, or 2 kb) and does not contain introns (non-coding regions) (see evidence) . the gene encodes a protein of 390 amino acids and two transmembrane segments. genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 59 each kir6. subunit is associated with a much larger sursubunit and also contains a binding site for atp. the binding of one molecule of atp causes a conformational change in the channel protein that closes the channel. a blast search using human kcnj11 as a query finds proteins in 30 different species, which are all metazoans. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse, rat, and nematode. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the kcnj11 gene, four (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein. at least two of these, rs5219 which encodes the e23 k polymorphism and rs5215 which encodes the i337 v polymorphism, have been associated with impaired insulin response and increased risk of type 2 diabetes (see below). figure 1. insulin secretion. 1. glucose is transported into the beta cell by type 2 glucose transporters (glut2). once inside, the first step in glucose metabolism is the phosphorylation of glucose to produce glucose-6-phosphate. this step is catalyzed by hexokinase; it is the rate-limiting step in glycolysis, and it effectively traps glucose inside the cell. 2. as glucose metabolism proceeds, atp is produced in the mitochondria. 3. the increase in the atp:adp ratio closes atp-gated potassium channels in the beta cell membrane. positively charged potassium ions (k+) are now prevented from leaving the beta cell. 4. the rise in positive charge inside the beta cell causes depolarization. 5. voltage-gated calcium channels open, allowing calcium ions (ca2+) to flood into the cell. 6. the increase in intracellular calcium concentration triggers the secretion of insulin via exocytosis.60 genetic landscape of diabetes kcnj11 and diabetes: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on kcnj11 and diabetes, search pub med. three common snps (e23 k, l270 v, and i337 v) have been found in the kcnj11 gene in caucasians ( -13 ). the e23 kvariant is caused by a switch of guanine to adenine, resulting in a glutamic acid (e) to lysine (k) substitution at codon 23. analysis of the e23 k variant in various caucasian populations shows that kkhomozygosity has a stronger association with diabetes compared with heterozygous ekor the wild-type ee. however, this risk has not been observed in other caucasian populations. to investigate the effect of e23 k, l270 v, and i337 von the functioning of the katpchannel, human potassium channels containing these snps were made. only one variant, e23 k, altered channel function; it made the channel less sensitive to atp. therefore, the e23 kchannels were more excitable; they needed greater amounts of atp before they closed and so were more likely to remain open. because the release of insulin is inhibited when the katp channel is open, e23 k is thought to contribute to the development of diabetes by impairing insulin release ( 14-16 ). the two genes that encode the katpchannel, abbc8 and kcnj11, reside adjacent to one another on chromosome 11. A variant of abcc8, called a1369 s, is in almost complete linkage disequilibrium with the e23 k variant of kcnj11. this means that from the genetic evidence, it is difficult to determine whether it is the a1369 s variant or the e23 k variant that predisposes to type 2 diabetes. individuals who are obese or have type diabetes, a chronic elevation of free fatty acids is seen. this leads to the accumulation of long-chain acyl-co as in pancreatic beta cells that stimulate k atp channels and inhibit insulin release. the diabetogenic effect of possessing both the e23 k and i337 v variants may involve an enhanced stimulatory effect of long-chain acyl-co as in polymorphic k atp channels. the theory that variations in the kcnj11 gene may inhibit insulin secretion is supported by a study of adults who did not have diabetes but did have the e23 ksnp. it was found that e23 kwas associated with a impaired insulin release in response to glucose and also an increased body mass index (bmi) ( 19). link roundup for kcnj11 live searches diabetes and kcnj11 in pub med pub med central books background information omimmolecular biology kcnj11 in entrez gene evidence viewer map viewer domain snps allelic variants blink homolo gene figure 3. Snp positions of kcnj11 mapped to the 3d structure of inward rectifier potassium channel 1. the figure shows the positions of some of the non-synonymous amino acid changes (green residues) caused by snps in the coding sequence. the enzyme lipoprotein lipase (lpl) summary lipoprotein lipase (lpl) is an enzyme that breaks down triglycerides. Lpl is functionally impaired or present at low levels in many type 2 diabetics. some evidence suggests that insulin plays a role in regulating lpl synthesis. background cholesterol and triglycerides circulate in the blood as a complex with proteins, called lipoproteins. there are several different types of lipoprotein: high-density lipoprotein (hdl), intermediate-density lipoprotein (idl), low-density lipoprotein (ldl), and very low-density lipoprotein (vldl). Vldl and ldlare sometimes referred to as bad cholesterol because they deposit cholesterol in arteries, which over time contributes to the lipid core of atherosclerotic plaques. ldlmakes up 6070% of the total cholesterol in blood, whereas vldl makes up 1015%. Idl is an intermediate between vldl and ldl. it is richer in cholesterol than vldl and in clinical tests gets collected with the ldl fraction. hdl, sometimes referred to as good cholesterol, makes up about 30% of blood cholesterol. the level of hdlis inversely correlated with the risk of coronary heart disease, and it seems to play a protective role. Hdl might carry cholesterol away from the arteries to the liver, where it is broken down. for more information about blood cholesterol levels, visit the national heart, blood, and lung institute . the breakdown and reformation of lipoproteins are interlinked via several steps that often require the action of enzymes, one of which is lipoprotein lipase (lpl). it is found in heart, muscle, and adipose tissue, where it breaks down triglycerides in vldl and chylomicrons by hydrolysis into idl (intermediate-density lipoprotein), fatty acids, and glycerol. although the fatty acids can be used as fuel, the idl, which is richer in cholesterol than vldl, is taken up by the liver or is formed into ldl(low-density lipoprotein). Lpl activity also indirectly raises hdl levels because lpl-mediated hydrolysis of vldl provides surface components that merge with hdl3 to form hdl2 particles. for a detailed description of lipoprotein interconversions, visit the university of manitoba. as well as the well-established role of lpl in lipid metabolism, it can also bind specific cell-surface proteins, often via heparan sulfate proteoglycans attached to epithelial cells. this action is independent of any catalytic activity, which means that lpl can "bridge" lipoproteins and the surface of cells, leading to an increase in the cellular uptake of lipoproteins. in the blood vessel wall, this action is thought to be proatherogenic. severe mutations in lpl cause a deficiency that results in type ihyperlipoproteinemia, a disorder characterized by high levels of lipoprotein and triglycerides in the blood.64 genetic landscape of diabetes molecular information lipoprotein lipase was so difficult to purify that the protein sequence had to be determined from the nucleotide sequence of its c dna. the lpl gene maps to chromosome. it has 10 exons (coding regions) that span about 28,800 bases. the gene encodes a preprotein of 475 amino acids that contains a signal peptide. cleavage of the signal results in a mature protein of 448 amino acids. lipoprotein lipase, along with hepatic lipase and pancreatic lipase, makes up a lipase superfamily; that is, based on a comparison of the amino acid sequence, all three proteins appear to have evolved from a common ancestor. all lipases, including evolutionarily unrelated prokaryotic lipases, share a serine protease-like catalytic triad of amino acids (ser-his-asp). another class of enzyme, serine proteases, hydrolyzes peptide bonds in many biological settings, for example, within the blood-clotting cascade. the similar catalytic triad seen in the lipase superfamily suggests that a similar mechanism of hydrolysis is used, this time to hydrolyze fats rather than peptides. site-directed mutagenesis experiments on lpl support this hypothesis. although the structure of lplhas not yet been solved, mapping the lpl sequence to the crystal structure of pancreatic lipase gives a good estimate of the structure of lpl. although the enzymatic activity involving the catalytic triad is in the large amino-terminal lipase domain (residues 1312), the smaller carboxy-terminal domain (the plat/lh2 domain ; residues 313448) binds the lipoprotein substrate. in nature, lpl occurs as a homodimer and, when in this form, binds to cell-surface molecules via several heparin-binding sites, a function that is thought to increase the cellular uptake of lipoproteins. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the lpl gene, seven (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein. at least three of these (rs268, rs328, and rs1801177) have been associated with observed cases of type ihyperlipoproteinemia (allelic variants .0033, .0014, and .0035, respectively). a blast search using human lpl as a query finds proteins in 38 different species, which are all metazoans apart from one bacterium, trichodesmium erythraeum , an oceanic nitrogen producer. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. a common complication of type 2 diabetes is microalbuminuria, that is, protein being excreted in the urine because of kidney damage through chronic inflammation. in a study of 386 type 2 diabetic patients, a correlation was found between the presence/severity of microalbuminuria and genetic variants of lpl. higher concentrations of ldl constituents have been linked previously to progression of microalbuminuria. furthermore, foam cells (white blood cells that have "mopped up" excess ldl or vldl) are observed in many chronic inflammatory diseases, including atherosclerosis and kidney disease. these observations point to a possible role for altered lpl in the progression of inflammatory kidney disease, and therefore the microalbuminuria often seen in diabetes type 2 patients. more articles like this another study compared the levels of lpl in the blood of 40 type 2 diabetes patients and a group of healthy individuals prior to heparin injection (10). because functional lpl is usually anchored to heparan sulfate proteoglycans on the surface of cells, heparin injection releases the enzyme into the blood. the amount of lpl in the type 2 diabetes patients was significantly lower than that of healthy individuals. however, after a course of insulin, the levels of lpl were increased in the diabetic patients. because this increase cannot be attributed to released lpl because no heparin injection was given, it must be caused by the administered insulin. this genetic factors in type 2 diabetes finding supports previous work showing that insulin plays a role in regulating lpl synthesis. more articles like this the h+ allele of the t495 ghind iii polymorphism of lpl is associated with coronary heart disease. this polymorphism was further investigated in 785 chinese subjects, of which about 60% had been diagnosed with early-onset type 2 diabetes (<40 years old). within this subset, the polymorphism was associated with higher plasma triglyceride and lower hdl-cholesterol levels. the snps were analyzed as groups inherited together on the same chromosome (haplotypes). one haplotype was associated with insulin sensitivity, another with insulin resistance. insulin resistance is a pathophysiological determinant of type 2 diabetes. of note, these same haplotypes were also associated with coronary artery disease, suggesting that lpl may be a genetic link between diabetes and atherosclerosis. link roundup for lpl live searches diabetes and lpl in pub med pub med central books background information cholesterol levels at the national heart, blood, and lung institute lipoprotein interconversions at the the university of manitoba type ihyperlipoproteinemia in: omimemedicine box continues on next page... figure 1. location of lplon the human genome. lpl maps to chromosome 8, approximately between 19,600 and 19,830 kilobases (kb). click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of lpl in the human genome. note: this figure was created from build 33 of the human genome. because the data are recomputed between genome builds, the exact location of lpl may fluctuate. the live web site may, therefore, not appear exactly as in this figure.66 genetic landscape of diabetes box continued from previous page. mechanism of hydrolysis , foam cells on the bookshelf molecular biology lipoprotein lipase in entrez gene evidence. the transcription factor pparg summary an important diabetes risk factor and drug target is peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (ppar). this protein is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor super-family of transcription factors. Ppar is a key regulator of fat cell differentiation. drugs that activate ppar increase sensitivity to insulin and lower blood sugar levels in diabetics. variants of ppar influence the risk of developing obesity and type 2 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma official gene symbol: pparg alias: ppar g1, pparg2 background small can be powerful. some genetic risk factors may increase the risk of developing a particular disease by only a small amount. but when the genetic risk factor is common, its effects can tip the balance toward millions of people developing disease. for type 2 diabetes, one such genetic risk is the gene that encodes ppar68 genetic landscape of diabetes (peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma). variants of this gene are among the first to be identified as causing a broad impact on the risk of developing type diabetes. there are three known subtypes of ppar alpha (), delta (), and gamma (). the latter subtype, ppar, is abundant in adipose tissue and plays a key role in fat cell differentiation. Ppar is also the target of the type 2 diabetes drugs called thiazolidinediones (tzds). found in the nucleus of many cells, ppars are both hormone receptors and transcription factors. ppars therefore have two binding sites, one site for ligands (such as fatty acids, hormones, and specific diabetic drugs) and one site for dna. to act as a transcription factor, ppar must first form a complex with another transcription factor called retinoid xreceptor (rxr). when a ligand such as the drug tzd binds to the receptor ppar, it activates the ppar rxr complex. the activated complex binds to the promoter region of specific genes and activates transcription. to date, several genes have been identified as being direct targets for ppar, including lipoprotein lipase (lpl), fatty acid transport protein (fatp), and acetyl co a-synthase (acs) ( 2). transcription of these genes influences the metabolism of fatty acids. tzds such as rosiglitazone can increase insulin-stimulated glucose disposal by activating the ppar rxr complex primarily in fat cells. in doing so, such drugs improve sensitivity to insulin and lower blood glucose levels in type 2 diabetes patients. molecular information nuclear receptors such as ppar are one of the largest groups of transcription factors known today. the members of this family are conserved functionally and structurally and are expressed in a wide range of multicellular (metazoan) species. a blast search using human pparg as a query finds proteins in 48 different species. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. the ppar gene maps to chromosome 3. it has 11 exons (coding regions) that span more than 140,000 bases. there are three isoforms that differ at their 5 ends. the isoform type 2 (ppar2) has an additional 84 nucleotides at its 5 end compared with the isoform type 1 and is also much less abundant than isoform 1, its highest levels being found in adipose tissue and the colon ( 4). the crystal structure of the ligand-binding domain of ppar has been solved and shares many structural features with other nuclear receptors, including a central dna binding domain and a ligand-binding domain (lbd) in the c-terminal half of the receptor. the lbd contains 11-13 alpha helices that fold to form a hydrophobic pocket where ligands can bind. the af2 (activating function-2) helix of ppar is found here and interacts with rxr and is thought to aid dimerization and transactivation of the two receptors and also initiates transcription. crystal structures of the heterodimer of ppar and rxrin complex with their ligands (such as rosglita zone and 9-cis-retinoic acid, respectively) have also been solved. such structures give us a molecular understanding of how ppar is able to bind a variety of ligands and aid the design of drugs that specifically target the gamma receptor. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the pparg gene, three (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in isoform type 2 of the protein np056953. at least one of these (rs1801282) has been associated with obesity (allelic variant .002). Pparg and diabetes: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on pparg and diabetes, search pub med. genetic factors in type 2 diabetes 69 the variant of the ppar receptor inherited may affect the risk of obesity or developing type diabetes. of particular interest is position 12 of the coding region. most people have the amino acid proline here; this confers a small risk of developing obesity, about 1.3%. for the individual, this 1.3% increase in risk is a small risk, but because 75% of the population have the proline allele, this translates into a tremendous impact on the number of people developing diabetes. acommon variant of the ppar2 is a single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) that has alanine in the place of proline at position 12 (pro12 ala). individuals who inherit this variant have a degree of protection against insulin resistance and obesity. one study screened pima indians of arizona for variations in ppar2. type 2 diabetes is particularly common among this population. affected individuals are obese and resistant to the insulin they produce in inadequate amounts. several new snps were identified, many in the promoter region of the gene. it is not yet clear which snps are the most important in contributing to diabetes in this and in other populations. link roundup for pparg live searches diabetes and pparg in pub med pub med central books box continues on next page... figure 1. location of pparg on the human genome. pparg maps to chromosome 3, approximately between 12,300 and 12,450 kilobases (kb). click or here for a current and interactive view of the location of pparg in the human genome. a variant of this regulatory sub-unit may interfere with the cascade of events that occurs after insulin binds to its receptor. nomenclature official gene name: phosphoinositide--kinase, regulatory subunit, polypeptide 1 (p85 alpha) official gene symbol: pik3 r1 alias: grb1, p85-alphabackground binding of insulin to its receptor triggers a cascade of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions beginning at the receptor itself (autophosphorylation) and specific target proteins of the receptor called insulin receptor substrates (irss). the cascade of phosphorylation reactions spreads to various cellular proteins and is finally terminated when the insulin receptor is dephosphorylated. enzymes that catalyze the phosphorylation of proteins are called kinases, and one particular kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (pi3-k), is a major pathway for the metabolic effects of insulin. it plays a key role in the stimulation of glucose transport, glycogen synthesis, and fat breakdown. pi3-kis made up of a catalytic subunit and a regulatory subunit. the regulatory subunit is encoded by the p85alpha gene, which generates three protein products of 85, 55, and 50 k da. each of the three proteins (p85alpha, p55alpha, and p50alpha) are found in different tissues and may have specific roles in various tissues. the p85alpha protein is the most common protein isoform in all tissues. insulin can initiate multiple signaling pathways, and the pi3-kenzyme is important in the "ras-independent pathway". after insulin binding and autophosphorylation of the receptor, irs-1 binds to a phosphorylated tyrosine residue on the receptor. the regulatory subunit of the pi3-kenzyme then binds via its src homology 2 (sh2) domains to the receptor-bound irs-1. the catalytic subunit phosphorylates specific lipids to produce a second messenger, pip3 (phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-phosphate). pip3 binds to and leads to the activation of protein kinase b, which in turn promotes the metabolic effects of insulin, promoting glucose uptake (by moving glut4 from intracellular stores to the plasma membrane) and glycogen synthesis (by activating glycogen kinase 3). the p85alpha gene is a candidate gene for the development of diabetes because of its role in insulin signaling. the most predominant protein this gene encodes is the p85alpha protein, but the p50alpha and p55alpha proteins may also have an important role. molecular information the pik3 r1 gene maps to chromosome 5. it has 17 exons (coding regions) that span over 75,000 bases. alternative splicing of the p85alpha gene results in three transcript variants that encode three different protein isoforms. the longest isoform (np852664) is 744 amino acids long. the regulatory subunit of pi3-kcontains two sh2 domains that bind to specific phosphorylated tyrosine residues present in motifs possessing the sequence yxxmor ymxm. these motifs are present on the insulin 72 genetic landscape of diabetes receptor and in all four of the insulin receptor substrates (irs-, -2, -3, and -4). for full activation of the kinase, both sh2 domains of the regulatory subunit need to bind to the motif present on irs-1. the resulting conformational change of the regulatory subunit activates the catalytic subunit. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the pik3 r1 gene, and these variants may be involved in the development of diabetes. each of the three protein variants encoded by this gene exhibit two (at the time of writing) amino acid changes caused by snps in the coding region of pik3 r1. a blast search using human pik3 r1 as a query finds proteins in 20 different species, which are all metazoans apart from five proteins found in fungi and one protein found in archaea (single-cell organisms that are distinct from bacteria). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. amethionine to isoleucine switch at residue 326 (m326 i) has been observed in europeans and japanese. this change occurs just six amino acids from the n-terminal sh2 domain and appears to affect glucose homeostasis. in the danish population, the variant was common in both diabetics and healthy subjects, with homozygous carriers being less effective at glucose regulation. in the pima indians, diabetes was less common in homozygous carriers compared with individuals who were heterozygous or wild type. the m326 i variant may lead to a reduced level of protein being expressed (but this may be offset by an observed increased interaction of the enzyme with irs-1). the enzyme variant may also be less efficient in supporting the development of fat cells and in supporting insulin-stimulated glucose uptake into certain cells. overall, the m326 i variant may only have a minor impact on the signaling events initiated by the insulin. but if combined with gene variants encoding other signaling proteins or acquired alterations in protein levels, this enzyme variant may contribute to a functional impact on insulin signaling and thus contribute to the events that lead to type 2 diabetes. the vast majority of diabetes cases fall into the categories of type 1, type 2, and diabetes that occurs during pregnancy (gestational diabetes). however, up to 5% of cases have other specific causes and include diabetes that results from the mutation of a single gene. genetic defects of beta cell function (mody and others) mody maturity onset diabetes in the young (mody) is an uncommon cause of diabetes that may be mistaken for type 2 diabetes because treatment of both conditions does not require insulin, at least in the early stages of the disease. however, many differences exist between mody and type 2 diabetes. whereas the nature of the genetic predispostion of type 2 diabetes is unclear with many susceptibility genes being implicated, mody is a monogenic condition (caused by a mutation of a single gene) that is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. the onset of diabetes usually occurs in childhood or adolescence, usually before 25 years of age, although the hyperglycemia is mild in some cases and may be missed, as with type 2 diabetes. when hyperglycemia is detected in children, mody may be misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes. genetic studies have defined a number of subtypes of mody. mutations in the genes encoding hepatic nuclear factor 4 (hnf4), glucokinase (gck), hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha and 1 beta (commonly known as hnf1 a and hnf1 b, but official symbols are tcf1 and tcf2, respectively), insulin promoter factor 1 (ipf-1), and neurod1 are the cause of the six known forms of mody (mody 1-6). see table 2 for a comparison of the mody-related genes. mody2 is caused by a mutant glucokinase enzyme that fails to accurately sense the circulating concentrations of glucose. all of the remaining mody genes encode transcription factors. hnf4 a, tcf1, tcf2, and ipf-1 form crucial links in the cascade of transcription factors that control the appropriate expression of beta cell genes, such as insulin and the glucose transporter glut2. mutations of these genes may disrupt the development of beta cells in the embryo and result in dysfunctioning beta cells in the adult. however, the precise role of these proteins in adult pancreatic islets is only beginning to be unraveled. mody3 and mody2 are the most common causes of mody but remain relatively uncommon causes of diabetes. table 1. comparison between type 2 diabetes and mody. characteristic type 2 diabetes mody inheritance polygenic monogenic, autosomal dominant age of onset usually >40 years of age usually <25 years of age pedigree rarely seen across generations usually seen across generations penetrance variable (10-40%) 80-90% obesity usually obese non-obese metabolic syndome1 usually present absent 1 metabolic syndrome: diabetes, insulin resistance, hypertension, and hypertriglyceridemia. comparison of mody-related genes. type of mody1 gene molecular basis mody1 hnf4 a abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion, beta cell mass, or both. mody2 glucokinase reduced phosphorylation of glucose results in a defect in sensitivity of beta cells to glucose and a defect in the storage of glucose as glycogen in the liver. mody3 tcf1 (hnf1 a) abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion, beta cell mass, or both. mody4 ipf1 abnormal transcriptional regulation of beta cell development and function. mody5 tcf2 (hnf1 b) abnormal regulation of gene transcription in beta cells causes a defect in the metabolic signaling of insulin secretion, beta cell mass, or both. mody6 neuro d1 (beta2) abnormal transcriptional regulation of beta cell development and function. mody, maturity onset diabetes in the young; hnf4 a, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4; tcf1, transcription factor 1; hnf1 a, hepatocyte nuclear factor 1; ipf1, insulin promoter factor; tcf2, transcription factor 2; hnf1 b, hepatocyte nuclear factor 1; neuro d1, neurogenic differentiation factor; beta2, beta cell e-box transactivator 2. other mutations that cause diabetes by impairing beta cell function mutations in mitochondrial dnaare a rare cause of diabetes. mitochondrial dna is a circular molecule that contains 37 genes that are passed on from the mother to her offspring. paternal transmission of mitochondrial dna is thought not to occur, because after fertilization, the fertilized egg destroys mitochondria derived from the sperm. diabetes and hearing loss are associated with a point mutation of mitochondrial dna. the mutation occurs in the gene that encodes t rnaleucine, leading to the substitution of guanine for adenine (ag) at position 3243. the t rnaleu 3243 mutation was originally identified in patients with the melas syndrome (mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like syndrome); however, diabetes is not part of this syndrome, suggesting that this mitochondrial mutation may be expressed as different phenotypes. the hnf4 agene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas. hnf4 ais found in a region of chromosome 20 that is linked with type 2 diabetes, and mutations of this gene cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes (mody1). nomenclature official gene name: hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha official gene symbol: hnf4 a alias: transcription factor 14, tcf14, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 1, mody178 genetic landscape of diabetes background the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver is regulated by the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor alpha (hnf4 a). many functions that the liver carries out may appear and disappear, depending on whether hnf4 ais expressed. in addition, hnf4 a controls the expression of another transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (hnf1 a), which in turn regulates the expression of several important genes in the liver, including hnf4 a. as the name suggests, hnf4 ais found in abundance in the liver, but it is also found in the beta cells of the pancreas, kidneys, and intestines. together with other transcription factors such as hnf1 aand hnf1 b(encoded by tcf1 and tcf2 , respectively), they make up part of a network of transcription factors that functions together to control gene expression in the developing embryo. in particular, hnf4 ais thought to play an important role in the development of the liver, kidney, and intestines. in pancreatic beta cells, this network of transcription factors regulates the expression of the insulin gene. in addition, hnf4 and hnf1 regulate the expression of several other genes linked with insulin secretion, e.g., genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport (glut2) and glucose and mitochondrial metabolism. the hnf4 a gene is suspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes; inheriting particular hnf4 a variants may alter insulin secretion and predispose toward hyperglycemia. mutations of hnf4 a can cause an extremely rare form of diabetes, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 1 (mody1). whereas type 2 diabetes is a disorder usually of late onset with significant polygenetic basis, mody by definition occurs in the young (onset at age less than 25 years) and is a monogenetic disorder inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. molecular information hepatocyte nuclear factors (hnfs) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation and metabolism. hnf4 ais an orphan receptor; the ligand(s) that binds to this receptor is unknown. a blast search using human hnf4 a as a query finds proteins in 47 different species, which are all multicellular species (metazoans). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in only three species: the mouse, rat, and the nematode caenorhabditis elegans. the hnf4 agene maps to chromosome 20. it has 11 exons (coding regions) that span over 30,000 bases. there are at least three different transcript variants of this gene, which encode three different protein isoforms. the longest m rna transcript, nm000457, encodes the longest hnf4 a protein (isoform b), containing over 450 amino acids. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps ) have been found within the hnf4 a gene. at the time of writing, three non-synonymous amino acid changes caused by snps have been observed in the longest protein isoform (isoform b). at present, none of these snps have been associated with either type 2 diabetes or mody. mutations in the hnf4 agene resulting in mody1 are rare; to date, only 13 families worldwide have been identified as having this form of mody. because hnf4 aregulates the expression of hnf1 a(the cause of mody3), the mechanisms that underly these forms of mody are thought to be similar.other types of diabetes 79 patients with mody1 or mody3 primarily have impaired beta cell function (shown by a defect in glucose- induced insulin secretion), as opposed to a primary defect in insulin activity. patients with these forms of mody present with a mild form of diabetes with a worsening of hyperglycemia over time, leading to up to % of patients requiring insulin. these patients have the full spectrum of complications of diabetes that is seen in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. in addition to its effects on beta cell function, a deficiency of hnf4 a affects the liver. in the developing embryo, hnf4 ais needed for normal liver architecture. in the adult, a deficiency of hnf4 a affects lipid synthesis and is associated with reduced serum levels of triglycerides and lipoproteins. glucokinase, encoded by the gckgene, catalyzes the first step of glucose metabolism in the liver. it may also be an important "glucose sensor" in the pancreas. mutant glucokinase causes a rare autosomal dominant form of diabetes (mody2) and may also play a role in type 2 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: glucokinase official gene symbol: gck alias: gk, hexokinase 4, hk4, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 2, mody2 background the enzyme glucokinase catalyzes glucose metabolism in the liver and in the pancreatic beta cell. glucokinase traps glucose inside the cell by catalyzing its phosphorylation to produce glucose-6-phosphate. this is the first and rate-limiting step in glycosis, a pathway that produces energy in the form of atp from glucose. glucokinase (also called hexokinase iv) differs from the other hexokinases that are found in other tissues. first, glucokinase has a lower affinity for glucose. this allows other organs such as the brain and muscles to have first call on glucose when their supply is limited. A second feature is that glucokinase is not inhibited by its product, glucose-6-phosphate. this lack of negative feedback inhibition enables hepatic glucokinase to remain active while glucose is abundant, ensuring that the liver can continue removing glucose from the blood ensuring that no glucose goes to waste. glucokinase is proposed to be an important "glucose sensor" in the following way. the rate of glucose metabolism is determined by the rate of glucose phosphorylation, which is catalyzed by glucokinase in the liver and pancreas. the liver and pancreas also express glucose transporter-2 (glut2), an insulin-independent cellular protein that mediates the transport of glucose into cells. the capacity of glut2 to transport glucose is very high, facilitating rapid equilibrium between extracellular and intracellular glucose. thus, in effect, the extracellular glucose concentrations are sensed by glucokinase. by catalyzing the rate-limiting step of glucose metabolism in the liver, glucokinase enables the liver to buffer the rise in glucose that takes place after a meal. in the pancreas, glucokinase is the glucose sensor for insulin release. the threshold for glucose-stimulated insulin release is about 5 mmol/l. mutations of gck that alter this threshold manifest as three different syndromes and highlight the importance of gck in glucose homeostasis and diabetes: 1.activating mutations lower the beta cell threshold for insulin release to as low as 1.5 mmol/l of glucose, leading to an increase in insulin release. this manifests as persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (phhi). inactivating mutations raise the beta cell threshold for insulin release. if two alleles altered by inactivating mutations are inherited, the level of glucose needed to stimulate insulin release from the pancreas is extremely high. affected individuals present with diabetes at birth (permanent neonatal diabetes).82 genetic landscape of diabetes .maturity onset diabetes in the young, type 2 (mody2) is caused by inheriting one allele that has been altered by an inactivating mutation. this partial inactivation leads to an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin release to about 7 mmol/l. this causes a mild hyperglycemia that is present at birth but often is only detected in later life. molecular information the hexokinase family consists of several enzymes that are all evolutionarily related. in vertebrates, there are four hexokinases named ito iv. glucokinase is a distinct member of this family with a different kinetic profile. a blast search using human gck as a query finds proteins in 46 different species, which range from metazoa (multicellular organisms), fungi, plants, and other eukaryotes. potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified in the mouse, rat, fly, mosquito, nematode worm, and the plant "mouseear cress". the gck gene maps to chromosome 7 . it has 12 exons (coding regions) that span about 46,000 bases. there are three gck transcript variants that differ in their first exons and their expression is tissue specific. one isoform predominates in the pancreatic beta cells; the other two isoforms are found in the liver. the glucokinase enzyme is found in the outer membrane compartment of mitochondria in these tissues. gck and mody2: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on gck and mody2, search pub med. around 200 mutations have been identifed in the gck gene. no one mutation appears to be a common cause of mody2, and the mutations are found throughout the gene. although mody is an uncommon cause of diabetes, mody2 is a common form of this disorder, especially in children with mild hyperglycemia and in women with gestational diabetes and a family history of diabetes. mody2 has been described in many different populations. unlike the other forms of diabetes, mody2 causes a hyperglycemia that is both mild and nonprogressive. although present from an early age, hyperglycemia is usually only picked up in adulthood during screening for other conditions and may be misdiagnosed as type 2 diabetes. mody2 can often be treated with diet alone. only 2% of patients require insulin therapy, and complications of diabetes are rare. the tcf1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas and is important in the development of these and other organs. A mutation of tcf1 causes a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes (mody3). nomenclature official gene name: transcription factor official gene symbol: tcf1 alias: hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha, hnf1 a, hepatic nuclear factor 1, hnf1, albumin proximal factor, lfb1, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 3, mody3 background tcf1 belongs to a network of transcription factors that co-ordinates the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver. in the embryo, this network of nuclear proteins guides the development of the liver and continues to be important in the adult. many functions of the liver appear and disappear, depending on the expression of these transcription factors. although found in highest amounts in the liver, this network of transcription factors is found in other organs, such as the pancreas and kidney. the transcription factor hnf4 a regulates the expression of tcf1 and may also regulate tcf2. in pancreatic beta cells, hnf4 and tcf1 regulate the expression of the insulin gene along with several other genes linked with insulin secretion, e.g., genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport (glut2) and glucose metabolism. because tcf2 has been found to be expressed in pancreatic islets, it has been suggested that tcf2 functions with tcf1 to regulate gene expression in beta cells. tcf1 and tcf2 share similar domains; they have a similar dna binding region and dimerization domain. the tcf2 protein is believed to form heterodimers with tcf1, and depending on the tcf2 isoform, the result may be to activate or inhibit transcription of target genes. mutations of hnf4 a, tcf1, and tcf2 each cause a distinct form of maturity onset diabetes in the young (mody). mutations of hnf4 a cause mody1, mutations of tcf1 cause mody3, and mutations of tcf2 cause mody5 . molecular information the tcf1 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes. in the early 1980s, important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly. these master control genes lay out the body plan, and if they are mutated, the development of the fly is disrupted. these genes were called homeobox genes after "homeotic", the description for a shift in structual development. homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain (a homeodomain) of about 60 amino acids. homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes, several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis. other types of diabetes 85 read more about homeodomains in gilbert's developmental biology the tcf1 gene maps to chromosome. it has nine exons (coding regions) that span about 25,000 bases. the gene encodes a protein of 631 amino acids in length. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the tcf1 gene, four (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein. one of these snps (rs1169288) has been associated with observed cases of mody3 ( allelic variant .0011). a blast search using human tcf1 as a query finds proteins in 31 different species, which are all metazoans apart from two fungi, one plant, and one bacterium. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. tcf1 and mody3: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on tcf1 and mody3, search pub med . in many populations, mutations in the tcf1 gene resulting in mody3 are the most common cause of mody. because the expression of tcf1 is regulated by hnf4 a (the cause of mody1), the mechanisms that underly these forms of mody are thought to be similar. patients with mody1 or mody3 primarily have impaired beta cell function (shown by a defect in glucose- induced insulin secretion), as opposed to a primary defect in insulin activity. patients with these forms of mody present with a mild form of diabetes with a worsening of hyperglycemia over time. up to 40% of patients require insulin, and the full spectrum of diabetes complications that are seen in type 1 and type 2 diabetes may develop. in animal models, a deficiency of the tcf1 gene causes hyperglycemia because of defective beta cell signaling, leading to defective insulin secretion. the beta cell dysfunction in mody3 may be caused by loss-of- function mechanisms, such as reduced dna binding and impaired transcriptional activation. in addition to its effects on beta cell function, a deficiency of tcf1 affects the kidneys and genital system. patients with tcf1 mutations have decreased renal reabsorption of glucose and excrete glucose in the urine (glycosuria). several of the m rna transcripts encoded by the mutant hnf1 a genes are unstable, suggesting that haploinsufficiency (deficient amounts of gene product) of hnf1 ais responsible for the pathogenesis of mody3. haploinsufficiency for hnf1 a may also cause diabetes that may be misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes but is not caused by an autoimmune attack (idiopathic type 1 diabetes). mody4: caused by a mutation in transcription factor ipf1 summary insulin promotor factor-1 (ipf1) is responsible for the development of the pancreas in the embryo and is also a key regulator of insulin gene expression. mutations of ipf1 cause a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes (mody4) and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: insulin promoter factor 1 official gene symbol: ipf1 alias: homeodomain transcription factor, islet/duodenum homeobox-1, idx-1, somatostatin transcription factor 1, stf-1, pancreas duodenum homeobox-1, pdx-1, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 4, mody488 genetic landscape of diabetes background in the developing embryo, the pancreas is formed from two buds of the primitive gut that eventually fuse together to form the pancreas gland. the exocrine part of the pancreas consists of cells that produce digestive enzymes, such as proteases and lipases, that are delivered to the gut via pancreatic ducts. the endocrine pancreas is much smaller and mainly consists of three cell types alpha, beta, and delta that produce glucagon, insulin, and somatostatin, respectively. the development of the pancreas has been well studied, and many transcription factors can be used to identify pancreatic cells at different stages of development. insulin promoter factor- (ipf1) is one such transcription factor and is an early pancreatic marker that is also found in adult beta cells. at a slightly later stage in pancreas development, tcf1 is expressed and is also found in adult beta cells. in the embryo, the presence of ipf1 is vital to ensure the correct development of the pancreas. loss of both copies of the gene can cause the pancreas not to form (pancreas agenesis). without ipf1, the proliferation and differentiation of precursor cells into the endocrine and exocrine parts of the pancreas are blocked. ipf1 continues to be essential for normal pancreatic function in the adult. ipf1 regulates the expression of several pancreatic genes, most notably insulin ((ins), glucose transporter type 2 (glut2), glucokinase (gck)), and somatostatin. loss of one copy of ipf1 has been linked to mody4 and may play a role in susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. the dual role of ipf1 during the development of the pancreas in the embryo and as a regulator of pancreatic genes in the adult underscores the importance of ipf1 in glucose homeostasis. molecular information the ipf1 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes. in the early 1980s, important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly. these master control genes lay out the body plan, and if they are mutated, the development of the fly is disrupted. these genes were called homeobox genes after "homeotic", the description for a shift in structural development. homeobox genes such as ipf1 are important in determining cell fates; in the embryo, the presence of ipf1 ensures that pancreatic precursor cells develop into their destined mature pancreatic cells. homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain (a homeodomain) of about 60 amino acids. homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes, several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis. read more about homeodomains in gilbert's developmental biology the ipf1 gene maps to chromosome 13. it has two exons (coding regions) that span about 6,000 bases. the gene encodes a protein of 283 amino acids in length. the ipf1 gene sequence is highly conserved throughout evolution. even a species that is distant in evolution from humans, such as the zebrafish, has a homeodomain that shares 95% homology with animal ipf1 homeodomains. a blast search using human ipf1 as a query finds proteins in 47 different species, which are all metazoans (multicellular organisms). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and the plant arabidopsis thaliana (the first plant for which the complete genome has been sequenced). in fact, the current understanding of mody is based on studies of a single family. in this family, an infant was born with agenesis of the pancreas that resulted in permanent neonatal diabetes and lack of pancreatic digestive enzymes. the infant was found to be homozygous for a deletion mutation in ipf1 that caused a frameshift. the resulting truncated protein did not contain the homeodomain that is essential for dna binding. family members who were heterozygous for the same mutation had a mild form of diabetes (now called mody4) that was being treated with either diet alone or oral hypoglycemic agents. being heterozygous carriers for the ipf1 mutation was linked with severely impaired insulin secretion. affected family members could be traced back to six generations. compared with other forms of mody, the expression of this form of diabetes may occur at later ages. further investigations into the role of ipf1 in the developing pancreas and in the functioning of the adult pancreas will improve our understanding of how beta cell dysfunction arises and leads to diabetes. the nature of figure 1. location of ipf1 on the human genome. the ipf1 gene maps to chromosome 13, approximately between 26,285 and 26,300 kilobases (kb). click on the figure or here for a current and interactive view of the location of ipf1 in the human genome. note: this figure was created from build 34 of the human genome. because the data are recomputed between genome builds, the exact location of ipf1 may fluctuate. therefore, the live web site may not appear exactly as in this figure.90 genetic landscape of diabetes ipf1 is also important when considering how to produce functional beta cells that can be transplanted in the hope that such cells can continue secreting insulin, thus providing a cure for diabetes. mody5: caused by a mutation in transcription factor tcf2 summary tcf2 encodes a transcription factor that is found in the liver and pancreas and is important in the development of these and other organs. a mutation of tcf2 causes a rare form of autosomal dominant diabetes (mody5). nomenclature official gene name: transcription factor 2 official gene symbol: tcf2 alias: hepatic nuclear factor 1 beta, hnf1 b, hepatic nuclear factor 2, hnf2, transcription factor, liver-specific ; variant hepatic nuclear factor, vhnf1, lfb3, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 5, mody5 other types of diabetes 91 background tcf2 belongs to a network of transcription factors that co-ordinates the expression of a wide range of genes in the liver. in the embryo, this network of nuclear proteins guides the development of the liver and continues to be important in the adult. many functions of the liver appear and disappear, depending on the expression of these transcription factors. although found in highest amounts in the liver, this network of transcription factors is found in other organs, such as the pancreas and kidney. the transcription factor hnf4 a regulates the expression of tcf1 and may also regulate tcf2. in pancreatic beta cells, hnf4 and tcf1 regulate the expression of the insulin gene along with several other genes linked with insulin secretion, e.g., genes that encode proteins involved in glucose transport and glucose metabolism. because tcf2 has been found to be expressed in pancreatic islets, it has been suggested that tcf2 functions with tcf1 to regulate gene expression in the beta cells. tcf1 and tcf2 share similar domains; they have a similar dna binding region and dimerization domain. the tcf2 protein is believed to form heterodimers with tcf1, and depending on the tcf2 isoform, the result may be to activate or inhibit transcription of target genes. mutations of hnf4 a, tcf1, and tcf2 each cause a distinct form of maturity onset diabetes in the young (mody). mutations of hnf4 a cause mody1 , mutations of tcf1 cause mody3 , and mutations of tcf2 cause mody5. molecular information the tcf2 gene is a member of the homeobox family of genes. in the early 1980s, important developmental genes were identified in the fruit fly. these master control genes lay out the body plan, and if they are mutated, the development of the fly is disrupted. these genes were called homeobox genes after "homeotic", the description for a shift in structural development. in the embryo, the presence of tcf2 is needed for the correct development of the kidneys and genital system. homeobox genes contain a conserved dna motif of 180 base pairs that encodes a domain (a homeodomain) of about 60 amino acids. homeodomains bind to certain regions of dna and regulate the transcription of many other genes, several of which in turn play a key role in the control of embryogenesis. read more about homeodomains in gilbert's developmental biology the tcf2 gene maps to chromosome 17. it has nine exons (coding regions) that span about 60,000 bases. the gene encodes a protein of 557 amino acids in length. there are at least two transcript variants of tcf2; a third variant has been identified in the rat but not yet in man. transcript variant a encodes protein isoform a, which predominates in the liver and stimulates transcription. transcript variant b contains an intron that is spliced out of other variants, and as a result the encoded protein, isoform b, has a distinct cterminus. isoform b appears to be unable to stimulate transcription and instead inhibits the transactivation activity of tcf1. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the tcf2 gene, two (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature protein. one of these snps (rs1800575) has been associated with observed cases of mody5 (allelic variant .0001).92 genetic landscape of diabetes a blast search using human tcf2 isoform a as a query finds proteins in different species, which are all metazoans apart from two fungi and one bacterium. however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse and rat. mutations in tcf2 are associated with mody5, severe renal defects, and genital malformations. although renal disease is a common complication of diabetes, the renal disease that is associated with tcf2 mutations and mody5 appears to be a direct result of the tcf2 mutation rather than a complication of hyperglycemia. several mutations of tcf2 have been identified, many of which involve a deletion that disrupts the dna binding domain. one such mutation was found in a norwegian family in which a deletion in exon 2 resulted in a protein that lacked amino acids arg-137 to lys-161. affected members had mild diabetes and non-diabetic renal disease that was worsening; both are features of mody5. in addition, two affected female carriers of this mutation had an undeveloped vagina and uterus. this mutant tcf2 protein was unable to bind to tcf1 and could not stimulate transcription of a target gene, indicating that this was a loss-of-function mutation. A deletion mutation of tcf2 that spared the dna binding domain was found to encode a protein with increased transactivation potential, suggesting that this was a gain-of-function mutation. when both types of human mutant tcf2 were overexpressed in the embryo of the developing frog, they both interrupted the proper development of the kidney. this reflects the different types of renal disease that are seen in individuals with different types of tcf2 mutations. these findings imply that tcf2 has a central role in normal kidney development. mody6: caused by a mutation in transcription factor neurod1 summary the transcription factor neurod1 can directly activate the transcription of the insulin gene. it is also needed in the development of the pancreas beta cells and the nervous system. mutations of this gene cause mody6, the most recently discovered form of autosomal dominant diabetes, and may also play a role in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. nomenclature official gene name: neurogenic differentiation 1 official gene symbol: neurod1 alias: neurod, neuro d, beta2, bhf-1, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 6, mody6 background the development and the normal functioning of the endocrine pancreas are dependent on a network of transcription factors. these proteins influence the transcription of genes in a negative or positive way. the neurod1 gene encodes a transcription factor that is a positive regulator for the transcription of the insulin gene. neurod1 (for "neurogenic differentiation") is a protein that was first discovered to be important in the development of the embyronic nervous system. the expression of neurod1 stimulates neurons to mature, or differentiate, and it has the potential to convert undifferentiated cells into neurones. in animal models, mutations of the neurod1 gene disrupts the normal development of the pancreas, leading to diabetes. certain structures in the brain, such as the cerebellum and hippocampus, also fail to develop properly, resulting in seizures. the link between neurod1 and diabetes was first suggested when it was discovered that the neurod1 gene is located in the same region of a chromosome that is linked with type 1 diabetes susceptibility. this region is called iddm7 and is found on the short arm of chromosome 2. in addition to the link with type 1 diabetes, variants of neurod1 have also been linked with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, and a mutation of neurod1 causes the most recently discovered form of autosomal dominant diabetes, maturity onset diabetes in the young type 6 (mody6). molecular information neurod1 belongs to a group of transcription factors called basic helix-loop-helix (b hlh) proteins. the b hlh proteins contain a conserved sequence of amino acids that binds to dna. this sequence is also known as a 96 genetic landscape of diabetes dna-binding motif, and the hlh motif consists of a short alpha helix connected by a flexible loop to a second, longer alpha helix (see the hlh domain ). b hlh proteins are classified into two groups based on how they bind to dna and in what tissues they are found. class a members tend to be expressed in all tissues, whereas class b members, such as neurod1, are found only in specific tissues, mainly in the nervous system and the pancreas. b hlh proteins can function as transcription factors only when two b hlh monomers complex to form a dimer. the two-helix structure of hlh binds both to dna and to the hlh motif of a second hlh protein. the second hlh protein can be the same (resulting in a homodimer) or different (resulting in a heterodimer), and alpha helices extending from the dimerization interface make specific contacts with dna. the neurod1 gene maps to chromosome. it has two exons (coding regions) that span about 4,860 bases. the gene encodes a protein of 356 amino acids. several single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) have been found within the neurod1 gene, three (at the time of writing) of which cause non-synonymous amino acid changes in the mature proteins. a blast search using human neurod1 as a query finds proteins in 24 different species, which are all metazoans (multicellular). however, potential true homologous genes have thus far been identified only in the mouse, rat, and roundworm. neurod1 and mody6: digest of recent articles for a more complete list of research articles on neurod1 and mody6, search pub med . neurod1, after its heterodimerization with the hlh protein e37, regulates transcription of the insulin gene. neurod1 binds to the e-box motif of the insulin gene promoter. it is proposed that deficient binding of neurod1 or binding of transcriptionally inactive neurod1 to target promoters in pancreatic islets leads to the development of diabetes. mutations in neurod1 have been found in three families to date, and these mutations are associated with type 2 diabetes and mody. in one family, a gt substitution in codon 111 caused a switch in amino acids at this position from arginine to leucine (arg111 leu). the arg-111 residue is found in the dna-binding domain of neurod1 and has been evolutionarily conserved from the fruit fly to mammals and is found in all members of the hlh family of transcription factors. in this family, the arg111 leu mutation was associated with type 2 diabetes; of the six carriers of the mutation, four were diagnosed with diabetes in their mid-40s, and two had impaired glucose tolerance. asecond family had an insertion of a cytosine residue in codon 206 (206+c), resulting in a frameshift mutation. the truncated protein that was synthesized lacked the c-terminal third of the protein, which includes the transactivation domain. of the nine carriers of the 206+cmutation, seven had diabetes. the nature of the diabetes observed in the second family was different in several ways: the diabetes was diagnosed at an earlier age and was more severe (2 of the 206+ccarriers required treatment with insulin), and the affected individuals were not obese and had low insulin levels. the early onset and severity of diabetes resemble mody rather than type 2 diabetes. thus, mutations in neurod1 are proposed to be the cause of a new subtype of mody, designated mody6. type 2 diabetes is thought to result from a combination of environmental, behavioral, and genetic factors, with the heritability of type 2 diabetes estimated to be in the range of 25% to 72% based on family and twin studies. since early 2007, genome-wide association studies (gwas) have led to an explosion of data for the genetics of type 2 diabetes and related traits. these gwas have occurred on the back - ground of genotyping arrays populated by common single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps), deployed in various cohorts that have coalesced to form large international consortia. as a result, a list of genetic loci that influence type 2 diabetes and quantitative glycemic traits has begun to accumulate. over 100 type 2 diabetes-associated loci have been identified, in addition to others involved in deter - mining quantitative glycemic traits, such as insulin resistance. however, no variant that is widely shared across populations has been found to have a stronger effect than the rs7903146 snp in tcf7 l2, which itself has only a modest effect (odds ratio 1.4). nonetheless, gwasfindings have illustrated novel pathways, pointed toward fundamental biology, drawn attention to the role of beta cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes, confirmed prior epidemiologic observations, and provided possible targets for pharmacotherapy and pharma - cogenetic clinical trials. on the other hand, the causal variants have only been identified for a handful of these loci, a substantial proportion of the heritability of these phenotypes remains unexplained, and this has tempered expectations with regard to their use in clinical prediction. together, the approximately 100 loci associated with type 2 diabetes thus far explain 10%15% of the genetic predisposition to the disease. limitations of early gwas included insufficient sample sizes to detect small effects, a nearly exclusive focus on populations of european descent, an imperfect capture of uncommon genetic variants, an incomplete ascertainment of alternate (non-snp) forms of genetic variation, and the lack of exploration of additional genetic models. as the community embraces complementary approaches that include systematic fine-mapping, custom-made replication, denser genotyping arrays, platforms that focus on functional variation, next-generation sequencing techniques, systems biology approaches, and expansion to non-european populations, the coming years will witness exponential growth in the understanding of the genetic architecture of metabolic phenotypes. whether these findings prove useful in disease prediction or therapeutic decision-making must be tested in rigorously designed clinical trials. type2 diabetes as a genetic disease the explosive parallel growth in the prevalence of the related metabolic disorders of obesity and type 2 diabetes in much of the developed and developing worlds over the past few decades is almost certainly driven by environmental and behavioral factors, since genetic components do not change in an appreciable manner over such a short time period. however, several lines of evidence suggest that variation in dna sequence does contribute to type 2 diabetes risk. first, twin studies have shown that concordance for type 2 diabetes is greater for monozygotic twins (who share 100% of their dna sequence) than for dizygotic twins (who, like siblings, share approximately 50% of their dna sequence). second, the incidence of diabetes is much higher in certain racial/ethnic groups, despite an environment that is relatively comparable to that of neighboring populations. third, family history is an independent risk factor for the development of diabetes in population studies. and fourth, rare familial forms of diabetes, caused by mutations in single genes (hence, termed monogenic or mendelian), prove that single base pair changes in the coding regions of key genes, which lead to alterations in protein sequence and function, are sufficient to cause hyper - glycemia in the diabetic range. consistent with this notion, the heritability of type 2 diabetes estimated in a set of scandinavian families ranges from 25% to 69%, and a large international meta-analysis of twin studies has reported a heritability estimate as high as 72%. diabetes in america, 3rd edition taken together, these observations illustrate that rapid changes in the global epidemiology of type 2 diabetes are likely caused by environmental and behavioral factors overlaid on a background of genetic predisposition. this genetic predisposition may vary across populations, in some measure due to their divergent genetic history and unequal selection pressures in specific geographic regions. thus, it is well known and described else that the risk of type 2 diabetes differs in the various ethnic groups that compose the u.s. population, and the presumption is that some of these differences are genetic in nature. why is genetic exploration relevant? regardless of whether genetic predictors become useful markers of disease onset or progression in clinical practice, the identification of genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes illuminates pathogenic mechanisms from which therapeutic windows may emerge. because germline genetic variation always predates the onset of disease, the arrow of time establishes a causal relationship that is not evident with other biologic associations. thus, the genetic approach has a unique opportunity to shed light on the pathophysiology of diabetes in its various manifestations, helping unravel its clinical heterogeneity and potentially refine therapeutic strategies. discovery of type2 diabetes genes before the sequencing of the human genome was accomplished, genetic mapping was dependent on the generation of anonymous genetic markers and their anchoring on specific locations in the genome. this task, first achieved with restriction fragment length polymorphisms and then with other markers, such as microsatellites or sequence tag sites, enabled the introduction of whole-genome linkage analysis and positional cloning, which proved extremely useful in the identification of genetic mutations that cause monogenic disease. the linkage approach, which depends on the co-segregation of a causal mutation with the anonymous marker along the lines of inheritance in pedigrees composed of affected and unaffected members, is particularly useful for traits where disease-causing alleles are highly penetrant: that is, the presence of the genetic variant virtually always co-occurs with disease, and its absence co-occurs with absence of the disease. as such, in the diabetes field, linkage analysis facilitated the discovery of the genes that underlie the various types of monogenic diabetes, such as maturity-onset diabetes of the young (mody) or neonatal diabetes; these are described in detail in chapter 7 monogenic forms of diabetes. in complex diseases, where the pheno type presumably arises as a combination of several genetic variants and their interaction with the environment, successful linkage analysis is considerably more difficult. though it succeeded in demonstrating the strong influence of the human leukocyte antigen (hla) region on type 1 diabetes, by and large, linkage analysis did not yield reproducible positive results for type 2 diabetes. this is because in type 2 diabetes there is not a single genetic locus that exerts a very strong effect in the general population or even in individual family pedigrees. thus, the effect of genetic variation is probabilistic rather than deterministic; a substantial proportion of people with some risk variants may be disease-free, whereas others who carry protective alleles may instead have type 2 diabetes, due to a constellation of other factors. in such situations, the amount of information provided by meioses within families, on which the power of linkage analysis depends, is greatly reduced, and the number of families required can be inordinately large. to demonstrate the effect of genetic variation on human phenotypes, an alternative approach was needed: association testing, which simply asks whether a specific allele is significantly overrepresented in diabetes cases compared to controls without diabetes, and which, with large sample size, has greater statistical power to detect a common variant of weak effect. its major limitation prior to 2005 was that only a handful of variants could be tested at a time, which required some prior biologic knowledge on the existence of such variants and the role of a given gene in diabetes pathophysiology. the discovery of millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) and their deposition in public databases; the manufacturing of genotyping arrays that could simultaneously query hundreds of thousands of snps with great precision; the understanding of an underlying correlation structure between snps, driven by the finite number of recombination events in human history, which reduced the complexity of the variation to be interrogated; the recognition that the scientific imperative of reproducibility required the acceptance of strict statistical thresholds that accounted for the universe of possible hypotheses in the human genome; and genetics of type diabetes.loci are arranged alphabetically by chromosome number. one representative variant and one or two genes are provided for each locus. loci are defined as association signals located within 500 kb of each other regardless of linkage disequilibrium. chr, chromosome. discovery of type 2 diabetes association followed detection in genome-wide association studies for quantitative glycemic traits. loci are arranged alphabetically by chromosome number. one representative variant and one or two genes are provided for each locus for each glycemic trait. loci are defined as association signals located within 500 kb of each other regardless of linkage disequilibrium. b, beta cell (fasting glucose, homa-b, corrected insulin response, disposition index, insulinogenic index, or these traits adjusted for bmi); bmi, body mass index; chr, chromosome; fp, fasting proinsulin; h, hemoglobin a1c; homa-band homa-ir, beta cell function and insulin resistance by homeostasis model assessment, respectively; i, insulin resistance (fasting insulin, 1-hour glucose, 2-hour glucose, homa-ir, or these traits adjusted for bmi). locus is also associated with type 2 diabetes. variant of inuit ancestry that is common in the greenlandic population (frequency 17%) and is associated with 2-hour glucose and insulin levels. stop codon homozygotes harbor a tenfold increased risk of type 2 diabetes compared to wildtype allele carriers. definitive identification of the implicated protein allowed for functional studies: the stop codon induces lower protein levels of tbc1 d4 in human skeletal muscle, causing reduced numbers of the glucose transporter glut4 and decreased insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, leading to postprandial hyperglycemia and impaired glucose tolerance. however, many of these gwas only captured common variants, because imputation of ungenotyped variants depended on available reference panels from resources such as the hap map. the introduction of massive parallel sequencing techniques and the concomitant dramatic drop in cost allowed for efficient, high-fidelity sequencing of thousands of samples. this enabled three major developments: first, denser reference panels could be developed for more accurate imputation of less common variants; second, targeted genotyping arrays that included less common but likely functional variation (e.g., coding variants) could be designed; and third, the allelic spectrum captured in case-control or quantitative trait studies could be expanded into less common frequencies, so that population genetics by which a rare variant may rise to prominence in a specific ethnic group could be exploited. arrays containing exome content deployed in large populations have identified coding variants in established or novel genes associated with type 2 diabetes or related quantitative traits. by detecting a robust association signal in the coding region of a specific gene (e.g., sgsm2 and proinsulin levels), these studies serve to advance the candidacy of said gene as the causal locus, from within the various possibilities under a noncoding gwas association peak. beyond genotyping, sequencing of whole exomes in europeans and mexicans has also yielded novel associations, and the extensive genetic and pedigree data available in the icelandic population have allowed whole-genome sequences in 2,630 icelanders to be extrapolated to a sample size of 11,114 type 2 diabetes cases and 267,140 controls for additional discovery. finally, whole-genome sequencing in 2,657 european individuals with and without diabetes and whole- exome sequencing in 12,940 individuals from five ancestry groups have begun to shed light on the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes in a more systematic fashion, in terms of plausible effect sizes, observed allelic frequencies, and the potential number of causal variants. all in all, these studies support a model in which type 2 diabetes is caused by hundreds or thousands of loci of modest effects, with no major role for low-frequency variants of strong effects in disease predisposition. Insights gained the tremendous success of gwas and their follow-up for type 2 diabetes and other human phenotypes have resulted in a number of insights into the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes. although the functional variants at most type 2 diabetes-associated loci are not yet known, most associated loci are located near genes that were previously unsuspected to play a role in type 2 diabetes pathophysiology. this observation highlights the complexity of the disease phenotype and the power of agnostic approaches in unearthing new knowledge. conversely, it brings to the forefront the constraints imposed by prior knowledge on scientific inquiry and points to the inadequacy of prior candidate gene selection efforts, as most logical candidate genes did not yield significant associations. this observation does not necessarily minimize the role of such biologic candidates on glucose homeostasis; rather, it may indicate natural selections little tolerance for functional variation in those key genes. noncoding variation can affect human phenotypes. the snps with the strongest associations are often found in introns, regulatory regions, or intergenic segments, i.e., they do not change the amino acid sequence of the encoded proteins. furthermore, for the most part, no obvious missense snp has been identified in coding regions for which the associated snp was a proxy and, thus, might have explained the association signal. the human genome is rife with regulatory sequences that influence the timing, location, and level of expression of genes, and these are thought to have a substantial impact on human biology. most genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes have modest effects. no common variant that is widely shared across populations has been found to have a stronger effect. some are either rare or unique to specific populations. moreover, pioneering whole- exome and whole-genome sequencing experiments in thousands of samples across multiple ethnic groups have failed to unveil a plethora of rare variant associations, and they have not provided support for the hypothesis that common variant association signals are undergirded by rare variants of strong effects thus, the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes appears to involve hundreds of variants with modest effects while rare variants might be found that have stronger effects in specific families or population groups, they are most likely to be private, as shared rare variants of strong effects should have been found by linkage. a corollary of this observation is that any single variant is unlikely to have significant predictive power in the individual, and even when many variants are combined into a genotype risk score (grs), predictive power is poor. together, the approximately 100 loci associated with type 2 diabetes thus far explain 10%15% genetics of type diabetes 147of the familial aggregation of the disease, or 5.7% of the variance in type 2 diabetes susceptibility. the majority of genetic variants that influence type 2 diabetes risk affect beta cell function. human studies have shown that most of the identified variants (whether causal or tagging a causal variant) are associated with impaired beta cell function, directly or indirectly. insulin secretion appears to be more heritable than insulin resistance, confirming the pathogenic hypothesis put forth by early geneticists, by which a mostly environmental insult causing insulin resistance is overlaid on a mostly genetic predisposition to beta cell dysfunction. the genetic architecture of beta cell function and insulin action seem to differ. as mentioned, measures of estimating beta cell function in humans are more amenable to genetic approaches (i.e., they have a higher likelihood of yielding significant findings) than measures of insulin sensitivity. insulin resistance might be influenced by fewer loci, less frequent variants or those with more modest effects, or a stronger environ - mental component. the genes that elevate fasting glucose in normal individuals are not necessarily the same genes that cause type 2 diabetes. while a simple model would predict that any locus that raises fasting glucose should raise risk of type 2 diabetes, the exploration of genetic determinants of glucose homeostasis in nondiabetic individuals has yielded a number of variants that do both (i.e., raise fasting glucose and increase type 2 diabetes risk), but also a non-trivial number that raise fasting glucose without appreciably increasing risk of type 2 diabetes. this observation has led physiologists to consider not just the magnitude of the glucose increase, but the manner in which this happens, as relevant to the emergence of disease. a simple elevation of the glucose set point, for example, may not necessarily lead to hyperglycemia in the diabetes range, if beta cell function is otherwise intact; however, an alteration that leads to progressive beta cell deterioration would cause diabetes in the future. genetic studies support prior epidemiologic observations. a gwas for fasting glucose yielded significant associations near two circadian genes (mtnr1 b and cry2 ). a growing literature implicates circadian dysregulation, through epidemiologic reports, animal studies, and human perturbation experiments, in metabolically deleterious phenotypes. thus, a gwas for glycemia provides a potential genetic link between the two systems. similarly, a snp in adcy5 has been associated with fasting glucose, type 2 diabetes, and low birth weight, once again corroborating the known relationship between being born small for gestational age and future risk of obesity and diabetes. in addition, snps in fto and mc4 r contribute to obesity, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes, thus connecting various components of the metabolic syndrome. most common risk variants are shared across ethnic groups . although gwas of comparable size and power have not yet been performed in non-european populations, when investigators have tried to ascertain whether common variants that influence these traits in people of european descent also do so in individuals of other continental ancestries, by and large, they have found similar effects; though, some loci do show heterogeneity. once allele frequency differences and altered haplotype structures are taken into account, analogous patterns of association emerge in african american, hispanic, asian, or native american populations. genetic information does not add much beyond clinical variables for type 2 diabetes prediction. commonly ascertained clinical variables are fairly precise at capturing future risk of type 2 diabetes; thus, adding the set of common variants known to date (which only explains a minor fraction of the genetic predisposition to type 2 diabetes) does not seem to improve predictive accuracy at the individual level or the ability to discriminate between risk strata in a clinically meaningful way. prediction is slightly improved in younger individuals, in whom clinical risk factors are not yet fully manifest. loci initially identified in populations of european descent appear to have similar effects in other racial/ethnic groups abquintile of genetic risk score fasting glucose. an intensive lifestyle intervention is effective in people with the highest burden of known risk alleles. the diabetes prevention program showed that an intensive lifestyle intervention, consisting of dietary and physical activity components, is effective even in the quartile of participants who carry the highest load of known risk variants. genetic variation may affect drug response. genetic information may eventually be used to guide medication choices in type 2 diabetes. though this is the standard of care for monogenic diabetes with examples in both mody and neonatal diabetes, the potential of genetically guided therapy is yet to be realized in common type 2 diabetes. a polymorphism in a metformin transporter may affect glycemic response to metformin, and a gwas for metformin response in people with type 2 diabetes has identified a polymorphism near the atm gene that influences metformin response in several independent cohorts, although it does not seem to exert the same effect for diabetes prevention in people with prediabetes. some sulfonylureas are metabolized by the cytochrome p450 enzyme cyp2 c9, and patients with loss-of-function variants in this gene are at increased risk of sulfonylurea-related hypoglycemia. these early pharmacogenomic lessons suggest that genes relevant to drug response may be the same as those that increase risk for type 2 diabetes, or they may be different. limitations of current approaches (and their solutions) despite the overwhelming success of gwas strategies in advancing knowledge of the genetic determinants of type 2 diabetes, a number of limitations must be recognized. these limitations have been identified by the research community and are being addressed to complement gaps in understanding. gwaswere initially undertaken only in populations of european descent . a large swath of genetic variation is unique to other populations, especially those of african descent, due to the bottleneck introduced when a limited subset of human ancestors migrated out of africa. in addition, genetic variants have been identified that, though present in europeans, are much more common in other populations, thereby acquiring greater statistical power to detect modest effects. gwas efforts in east asian south asian, african american, hispanic, and native american cohorts have already yielded novel genome-wide significant findings, many of which are also seen in europeans. as larger consortia and transethnic meta-analyses are undertaken, more novel findings are expected to come to light. gwas of large cohorts suffer from relatively crude phenotyping . because sample size is paramount to achieve adequate statistical power, gwas are typically carried out in very large population cohorts where only limited phenotyping is feasible. the estimates of beta cell function or insulin sensitivity derived from simple measures, such as fasting glucose or insulin (as opposed to those obtained from more labor-intensive and costly dynamic testing), are relatively imprecise. however, some of the participating cohorts do have more sophisticated phenotyping: while the partcipants have contributed their simple traits to the meta-analytic efforts, the investigators are also able to form subconsortia where additional physiologic inquiry can be carried out. this type of analysis has been performed for proinsulin levels adjusted for fasting insulin, various dynamic measures of insulin secretion, and insulin sensitivity derived from clamp studies, and it is underway for insulin sensitivity derived from oral glucose tolerance tests and insulin clearance. gwasonly capture common variants . due to the composition of genotyping arrays and statistical issues around rare observations, most gwas to date have concentrated solely on common variation (i.e., minor allele frequency >5%). the introduction of next-generation dna sequencing technologies has allowed for a downward expansion in the characterization of shared uncommon variation, as sequencing >1,000 individuals from multiple ethnic groups in the 1000. an intensive lifestyle intervention, as deployed in the diabetes prevention program, is effective regardless of genetic risk score for type 2 diabetes. given the rapid progress achieved in genetic discovery in type 2 diabetes and the multipronged approach deployed to overcome experimental limitations, there is great hope that the pace will be maintained and a substantial part of the genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes will be elucidated in the coming years. if this vision is realized, a number of conceptual advances can be expected. the nosology of disease will be refined . type 2 diabetes, diagnosed solely on the basis of the final common pathway of hyperglycemia, is likely a heterogeneous syndrome that can be caused by a variety of processes. genetic etiologies have already helped classify the various forms of mody and neonatal diabetes, and an analogous exercise could take place in type 2 diabetes. the categorization of the disease into subtypes based on genetic determinants of physiology, prognosis, or predisposition to complications should help stratify the patient population into groups for which therapeutic or surveillance decisions might be better tailored. novel pathways will be identified . unsuspected biology is already being uncovered via genetic discovery. with a greater number of genetic loci at hand, pathways or systems (e.g., cell proliferation) can be identified, some of which may be amenable to the development of new therapeutics. genetic discovery may identify drug targets. as mentioned above, among the initial type 2 diabetes genetic associations were coding variants for pparg, the gene that encodes the target of thiazolidinedi - ones, and kcnj11/abcc8 , the genes that encode the targets for sulfonylureas. more recent studies have identified the target for glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists as another type 2 diabetes-associated gene. this proof of principle for established type 2 diabetes drug targets indicates that among the many type 2 diabetes-associated loci, there might be other genes for which a suitable drug might be found or developed. aggregating all of the genetic data in humans and model systems, as well as ancillary associations that might point to off-target effects, will be essential if the genomic revolution is to catalyze new drug discovery. stratification of patients may allow for better targeting of public health or clinical trial interventions. some preventive or therapeutic measures may be too expensive to deploy in the population at large, or they may be futile in specific subgroups. genetic characterization may help identify the groups of people more likely to benefit from particular public health strategies. similarly, the efficiency of clinical trials may be enhanced by enrolling participants who are more likely to reach the desired endpoints or benefit from the agents being tested. genetics may facilitate the implementation of precision or personalized medicine. though it is not yet clear that genetic information will be powerful enough to apply therapeutic decisions at the individual level, it may help do so for specific subgroups. for example, genetic approaches may unveil who is more likely to develop a particular diabetic complication. for such an approach to be feasible, researchers envision that in the not too distant future, any individual who joins a public or private health care system would be genotyped or sequenced for the full list of actionable genetic variants (e.g., those that modify risk of common diseases or response to available medications), such that his/her information is available in the electronic medical record. when the time comes to make specific screening or therapeutic decisions, genetic information filtered through appropriate decision support tools would automatically guide the practitioner into the course of action most appropriate to the person and situation at hand. conclusion in sum, the genetics of type 2 diabetes is in a steep discovery curve. progress has been uneven, however, with most efforts focused on common variants and populations of european descent. the rapid and continuing progress in genotyping and sequencing technologies, with a concomitant improvement in affordability, the growing understanding of the human genome, and the ongoing development of analytical tools and methods present an optimistic perspective on the future. whether this newfound knowledge will translate into improved patient care depends on the ability to design and execute genetically based and outcomes-driven clinical trials. diabetes mellitus type 2 what is it? diabetes is a common health problem in the u.s. and the world. in diabetes, the body does not use the food it digests well. it is hard for the body to use carbohydrates and fats. the main marker of diabetes is high blood sugar (glucose). your blood sugar is kept in check by insulin. insulin is a hormone that is made in the pancreas. when you get diabetes, it is related to two things: the amount of insulin your body makes how well your bodys cells use insulin. there are two different types of diabetes: type 1 and type 2. only about 5% of people have type 1. type 1 used to be called other names (juvenile diabetes, insulin- dependent diabetes). in type 1, the pancreas does not make insulin. it usually starts as a child or teen. type 2 often starts after age 40. type 2 used to be called other names too (adult-onset diabetes). obese teens can also get type 2. in type 2, your pancreas makes insulin. but, it does not make enough insulin. or, your body cannot u se the insulin as well. this often happens when you are obese. at first, your body will make more insulin to try to keep up. but, when the body can no longer keep up, diabetes comes on. type 2 often runs in families. symptoms symptoms of type 2 come from high blood sugar. they include: frequent urination extreme thirst and hunger weight loss more likely to get skin and vaginal infections infections or cuts that heal very slowly or not at all. blood sugar that is not in control can lead to coma. there are two types of comas: the form that happens in type 1 diabetes (called ketoacidosis) the form that happens in type 2 diabetes (called hyperosmolar) you may take insulin or pills to make your blood sugar go down. if your blood sugar drops too far y ou will get low blood sugar (called hypoglycemia). low blood sugar has symptoms. they include: sweating trembling dizziness hunger confusion seizures loss of consciousness. blood sugar that stays high leads to long term problems from diabetes. you may not notice these problems for years. these are some: damage to the eyes (called retinopathy) can cause blindness. damage to the nerves (called neuropathy) can cause numbness, tingling and pain in your feet, legs, and arms. usually people feel it in the feet first. damage to the kidneys (called nephropathy) can cause your kidneys to stop working. you need your kidneys to get rid of waste products. you are also more likely to get heart disease. your heart has arteries that carry blood to the rest of your body. the trouble comes on when your arteries get narrow (called atherosclerosis). then, blood does not flow well to parts of the body. this can happen in different parts of the body: heart, brain, legs. and, it leads to different problems: coronary heart disease (heart) cerebrovascular disease (brain) peripheral artery disease (legs) diabetes education # symptoms include: chest pain heart attack heart failure stroke leg pain when you walk or exercise that feels better when you rest. you may have trouble getting blood to your legs and feet. this can cause foot ulcers and infections. the ulcers and infection can cause tissue to die (called gangrene). this in turn may lead to amputation. what your doctor looks for your doctor will look for signs of diabetes. obesity, especially around the middle (abdominal obesity). this is a waist that is more than 40 inches around in men or 35 inches around in women. high blood pressure signs of eye disease on eye examination decreased feeling and reflexes in the legs poor pulses in the feet blisters, ulcers or infections of the feet abnormal heart rhythm your doctor will also do lab tests. fasting blood sugar (this tests your blood sugar before you have had anything to eat or drink.) hemoglobin a1c (this test measures your average blood sugar level over the past 2 to 3 months.) lipid profile (this measures cholesterol, triglycerides, hdl and ldl cholesterol. it tells how likely it is that your arteries are narrowed.) blood creatinine and urine microalbumin (these tests look for signs of kidney disease.) your doctor may also do an eye exam. he/she will look for early signs of eye disease. your doctor may also do a foot and ankle exam. he/she will touch your foot with a small wire. this tests whether you can feel the wire on your feet and ankles. diagnosis your doctor will use your fasting blood tests to see if you have diabetes. your blood sugar should not be more than 126 mg/dl on this test. you have diabetes if: your blood sugar is more than 126, and you number stays high on more than one fasting test. expected duration there is no cure for diabetes. it lasts your whole life. type 2 can get much better in some obese people who lose weight and keep it off. prevention you can help prevent type 2 diabetes. you should keep your body weight within the normal range for your height. this is key if diabetes runs in your family. if you already have diabetes, its not too late. you can delay or stop later problems (retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy). be sure to keep tight control of your blood sugar. there are ways to lower your risk of heart problems. you should not smoke. here are risk factors you can help control: high blood pressure high blood fats (cholesterol and triglycerides) obesity treatment and management in most people who have type 2 diabetes, treatment starts with weight. diet and exercise are used for weight loss. the diet is like ones used to lower bad fats and stop risk of heart disease. most people who have type 2 can control their blood sugar with pills at first. these include ones in the table. you may use pills for many years. but, over time, you may need insulin. or, you may need insulin right away. you should talk to your doctor about which medicine is right for you. metformin is suggested as the first one to try. diabetes education # medicine class medicine name how it works sulfonylureas repaglinide (prandin) nateglinide (starlix) increases the amount of insulin released by your pancreas biguanide metformin (glucophage) lowers the amount of sugar produced by the liver, helps your body use insulin better thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone (avandia) pioglitazone (actos) helps your body use insulin better alpha-glucosidase inhibitors acarbose (precose) delays the absorption of sugars from the intestine the pills used to treat type 2 diabetes can have many side effects. see the table for the major ones. medicine side effects sulfonylureas low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) weight gain metformin + insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) thiazolidinedione + insulin or sulfonylureas low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) metformin nausea and diarrhea (less common if you take the medicine with a meal) life threatening problems for people who already have liver or kidney disease. thiazolindinediones can affect your liver so you need to have routine blood tests acarbose extreme gas and bloating you should treat high bad cholesterol (ldl). medicines that work to lower this are in the table. type of medicine medicine statins to lower ldl cholesterol lovastatin, pravastatin, simvastatin, fluvastatin, atorvastatin, rosuvastatin bile acid sequestrants to lower ldl cholesterol cholestyramine (questran), colestipol (colestid), colesevelam (welchol) new medicine to lower ldl cholesterol ezetimibe ( zetia) medicines to lower triglycerides gemfibrozil, fenofibrate to control diabetes you should watch your diet, keep fit, and take your pills. if this is not enough, you may need to take insulin each day. you may also need to stick to a meal plan and eat meals at regular times. this will lessen your chances of having low blood sugar. test your blood sugar each day. this is a key part of managing your diabetes. this is true no matter which medicines you take. you will use a tiny needle (called a lancet) to get a small bit of blood. the fingertip is usually the place that is used. the testing meter will tell you how much sugar is in your blood. you should know the target ranges for your blood sugar. 90 120 mg/dl before you have had anything to eat or drink 120 180 mg/dl after meals if you know your blood sugar level you can choose types and amounts of food. you can also choose how to keep active. if your blood sugar is always diabetes education # in the target range, you are not cured. it means that you are doing a good job of managing your diabetes. you will have a better chance at a good quality of life. it is less likely that you will have long term problems from diabetes. when to call your doctor with diabetes, you are at higher risk for loss of body fluids (dehydration). call the doctor if you have nausea or vomiting that lasts. follow the testing schedule your doctor gives you for sick days. this should tell you how often to test: your blood sugar your urine for ketones. call your doctor right away if: you have blood sugars that are very high (more than 400 500 mg/dl). your doctor may want you to call before it gets that high. you have large amounts of ketones in your urine. have your family call the doctor right away if you show these signs : dehydration dry skin nausea vomiting confusion coma these are signs of severe high blood sugar problems (ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar coma). prognosis type 2 diabetes can have a good outcome. there are things you must do to help. control your blood sugar. maintain a normal weight. reduce your risk factors for heart disease.