basic genetics and molecular biology basic genetics- the laws of inheritance are investigated by genetics. the different nucleic acids (dna and rna) in the living organism play a central role in the inheritance of the different features. the information in the dna molecule is inherited from one generation to the next generation through reproduction. it means that the hereditary material is the dna (in some viruses the rna), more exactly the genes which are the functional units which determine the nature of the features. gene definition: genes are the units of inheritance. genes are pieces of dna that contain information for synthesis of ribonucleic acids (rnas) or polypeptides. earlier, only those units were regarded genes, which coded proteins. nowadays, genes are also those, which code functional rnas, which are not transcribed to proteins. these are called non - coding rnas. in the so - called rna- viruses (e.g. influenza, hiv1) genes are coded only in the form of rna. the appearance of an organism which results from the expression of an organism's genes, as well as the influence of environmental factors and the interactions between the two is called phenotype. the genetic background of an organism is called genotype. the majority of the dna content of the cells is packaged in chromosomes, and dna can be also found in mitochondria. in diploid cells, a couple of homologous chromosomes are a set of one maternal chromosome and one paternal chromosome that pair up with each other inside a cell during meiosis. these copies have the same genes in the same locations, or loci. in the nature, a given gene can have different variations, these are called alleles. in a given population, the most frequent allele of a gene is called wild type. if in a diploid cell the same alleles occur in a given locus of the homologous chromosomes, then the organism is homozygous, if the alleles are different, it is heterozygous at this locus. mendelian inheritance- the founder of the modern science of genetics was johann gregor mendel. mendel's pea plant experiments established many of the rules of heredity, now referred to as the laws of mendelian inheritance. mendel’s laws are law of segregation, law of independent assortment, and law of dominance. law of segregation (the "first law") states that the two alleles for a heritable character segregate (separate from each other) during gamete formation and end up in different gametes. law of independent assortment (the "second law"), also known as "inheritance law", states that separate genes for separate traits are passed independently of one another from parents to offspring. law of dominance (the "third law") states that recessive alleles will always be masked by dominant alleles. therefore, a cross between a homozygous dominant and a homozygous recessive will always express the dominant phenotype, while still having a heterozygous genotype. a mendelian trait is one that is controlled by a single locus in an inheritance pattern. in such cases, a mutation in a single gene can cause a disease that is inherited according to mendel's laws. these diseases are called monogenic diseases. dominant - recessive inheritance in dominantly inherited diseases only one faulty gene is enough for the manifestation of the disease. such disease is e.g. familial hypercholesterolemia or huntington disease. in cases of recessive diseases, the faulty gene product is compensated by the normal variant. in this case, two mutated homologous genes are required for the manifestation of the disease. such diseases are e.g. cystic fibrosis or albinism. the codominant inheritance is a variation of the dominant - recessive inheritance. in case of codominant inheritance, two different alleles of a gene can be expressed, and each version makes a slightly different protein. both alleles influence the genetic trait or determine the characteristics of the genetic condition. e.g. blood type ab is inherited in a codominant pattern. here the a and b blood group is dominant over o blood group and show codominant inheritance to each other. it means that if a person has one gene for a blood group, one for o blood group, then his/her blood group will be a, in the case of one a and one b, the blood group will be ab. polygenic inheritance- in most cases, however, a trait or feature is determined more than one allele pair. often the genes are large in quantity, but small in effect. examples of human polygenic inheritance are height, skin color, eye color, weight and diseases like diabetes mellitus, high blood pressure, asthma, allergy, or atherosclerosis. genetic pleiotropy- it can also occur that an allele pair is responsible for more than one trait. here, the product of the gene participates in several metabolic pathways, which have effects on different organs or tissues. in this case, mutations in this gene can have different consequences. it is called genetic pleiotropy. a classic example of pleiotropy is the human disease phenylketonuria (pku). this disease can cause mental retardation and reduced hair and skin pigmentation and can be caused by any of a large number of mutations in a single gene that codes for the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase, which converts the amino acid phenylalanine to tyrosine, another amino acid. sex - linked inheritance: humans have altogether 46 chromosomes, which consist of 22 pairs of autosomes in both females and males and two sex chromosomes. there are two copies of the x- chromosome in females (homogametic), but males have a single x- chromosome and a y- chromosome (heterogametic). genes on the x or y chromosome are called sex-linked. since humans have many more genes on the x than the y, there are many more x-linked traits than y-linked traits. the gender of the offspring is determined by the sperm. cytogenetics is a field of genetics dealing with species or cell specific number of chromosomes, and their structure and characteristic segments, their functional roles, and all the differences- namely the chromosomal mutations - related to them. with cytogenetic methods (e.g. with chromosome staining) the chromosome x and y can be easily differentiated. chromosome x is significantly larger than the y. both chromosomes contain homologous and non-homologous regions. the non-homologous regions contain genes which do not have pairs in the other chromosome. in males, these genes are in hemizygotic state. females possessing one x-linked recessive mutation are considered carriers and will generally not manifest clinical symptoms of the disorder. all males possessing an x-linked recessive mutation will be affected, since males have only a single x-chromosome and therefore have only one copy of x-linked genes. all offspring of a carrier female have a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation if the father does not carry the recessive allele. all female children of an affected father will be carriers (assuming the mother is not affected or a carrier), as daughters possess their father's x-chromosome. no male children of an affected father will be affected, as males only inherit their father's y-chromosome. because sex chromosomes contain different numbers of genes, different species of organisms have developed different mechanisms to cope with this inequality. dosage compensation is the equalization of gene expression in males and females of a species. in humans, the females (xx) silence the transcription of one x chromosome and transcribe all information only from the one expressed x chromosome. thus, females have the same amount of expressed x-linked genes as the human males (xy) who have just the one x chromosome to express from which to transcribe and express genes. the x inactivation, also called lyonization happens early in embryonic development at random. the inactive x chromosome in a female somatic cell is called a barr body. linked inheritance, recombination: if two genes are close to each other on a chromosome, then the associated traits inherited together. in this case, the mendel’s first and second laws are not valid, and this phenomenon is called linked inheritance, and the two genes are in linkage. in meiosis, dna replication is followed by two rounds of cell division to produce four daughter cells with half the number of chromosomes as the original parent cell. the two meiotic divisions are known as meiosis I and meiosis ii. before meiosis begins, during s phase of the cell cycle, the dna of each chromosome is replicated so that it consists of two identical sister chromatids attached at a centromere. in meiosis i, homologous chromosomes pair with each other and can exchange genetic material in a process called chromosomal crossover or crossing over or homologous recombination. during this process, the alleles of the two homologous chromosomes can exchange with each other. recombination results in a new arrangement of maternal and paternal alleles on the same chromosome. although the same genes appear in the same order, but some alleles are different. during meiosis, crossing over occurs between two homologous chromosomes. on two strands, the order of the alleles changed. mutation: mutation is a permanent alteration in the dna sequence, such that the sequence differs from what is found in most people. mutations range in size; they can affect anywhere from a single dna building block (base pair) to a large segment of a chromosome that includes multiple genes. the exact cause of a given mutation is generally unknown. mutations can occur through the effect of a mutagenic agent or during the replication of the dna. during replication, on average, one mutation occurs in every 100 millionth nucleotides. the effect of the majority of mutations does not appear phenotypically, but if it occurs on a functionally important position, then the consequence can even be serious illnesses, like cancer or inherited diseases. if the mutation occurs in a gene, then it is called gene mutation. the chromosomes are fragile structures if they are mutated it is called chromosome mutation. chromosome mutation can be: duplication, deletion, translocation, inversion and insertion. basics of molecular biology: the central dogma in molecular biology can be described as "dna makes rna and rna makes protein,". however, this simplification does not make it clear that the central dogma does not preclude the reverse flow of information from rna to dna, only ruling out the flow from protein to rna or dna. some characteristics of the human dna: the proteins coded by the dna in our cells determine the structures and functions of the cells. if there is a mutation in the dna, it can change the structure and function of the protein, which can have consequences on the function of the cell and can lead to diseases. the structure of the dna in our cells where the backbone of the dna strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar residues. the sugar in dna is 2-deoxyribose, which is a pentose (five - carbon) sugar. the sugars are joined together by phosphate groups that form phosphodiester bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings. these asymmetric bonds mean a strand of dna has a direction. in a double helix, the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand: the strands are antiparallel. the asymmetric ends of dna strands are called the 5’ (five prime) and 3’ (three prime) ends, with the 5’ end having a terminal phosphate group and the 3’ end a terminal hydroxyl group. one major difference between dna and rna is the sugar, with the 2-deoxyribose in dna being replaced by the alternative pentose sugar ribose in rna. the four bases found in dna are adenine (abbreviated a), cytosine(c), guanine (g) and thymine (t). these four bases are attached to the sugar/phosphate to form the complete nucleotide, as shown for adenosine monophosphate. the nucleobases are classified into two types: the purines, a and g, being fused five- and six-membered heterocyclic compounds, and the pyrimidines, the six-membered rings c and t. a fifth pyrimidine nucleobase, uracil (u), usually takes the place of thymine in rna and differs from thymine by lacking a methyl group on its ring. uracil is not usually found in dna, occurring only as a breakdown product of cytosine. in a dna double helix, each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand. this is called complementary base pairing. here, purines form hydrogen bonds to pyrimidines, with adenine bonding only to thymine in two hydrogen bonds, and cytosine bonding only to guanine in three hydrogen bonds. this arrangement of two nucleotides binding together across the double helix is called a base pair. as hydrogen bonds are not covalent, they can be broken and rejoined relatively easily. the two strands of dna in a double helix can therefore be pulled apart like a zipper, either by a mechanical force or high temperature. as a result of this complementarity, all the information in the double-stranded sequence of a dna helix is duplicated on each strand, which is vital in dna replication. indeed, this reversible and specific interaction between complementary base pairs is critical for all the functions of dna in living organisms. a dna sequence is called "sense" if its sequence is the same as that of a messenger rna copy that is translated into protein. the sequence on the opposite strand is called the "antisense" sequence. both sense and antisense sequences can exist on different parts of the same strand of dna (i.e. both strands can contain both sense and antisense sequences). in human cells, dna is in two compartments. nuclear dna, or nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid (n dna), is dna contained within a nucleus of the cell. nuclear dna encodes for the majority of the genome, with dna located in mitochondria coding for the rest. nuclear dna adheres to mendelian inheritance, with information coming from two parents, one male and one female. the other dna containing compartment is the mitochondria. mitochondria are cellular organelles within eukaryotic cells that convert chemical energy from food into a form that cells can use, adenosine triphosphate (atp). in most multicellular organisms, including humans, the mitochondrial dna (mt dna) is inherited from the mother (maternally inherited). nuclear dna and mitochondrial dnadiffer in many ways. the structure of nuclear dna chromosomes is linear with open ends and includes 46 chromosomes containing more than 3 billion nucleotides (3.38 *10^9). mitochondrial dna chromosomes have closed, circular structures, and contain 16,569 nucleotides. nuclear dna is located within the nucleus of eukaryote cells and usually has two copies per cell, while mitochondrial dna is located in the mitochondria and contains 100 to 1,000 copies per cell. nuclear dna contains more than 20 thousand protein coding and more than 23 thousand non-coding genes. the mitochondrial dna contains 37 genes. of the 37 genes, 13 are protein coding, 2 rrna and 22 trna coding genes. the mutation rate for nuclear dna is less than 0.3% while that of mitochondrial dna is generally higher. as mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell, mutations of its dna will have an effect on the power production processes of the cell, and will have serious consequences especially in tissues with large power need, like liver, neurons and muscle. as the mutation rate in the mitochondrial dna goes higher, the mitochondrial diseases usually deteriorate with age, and can play also a role in the aging processes. replication- dna replication is the process of producing two identical replicas from one original dna molecule. this biological process occurs in all living organisms and is the basis for biological inheritance. dna is made up of two strands and each strand of the original dna molecule serves as a template for the production of the complementary strand, a process referred to as semiconservative replication. cellular proofreading and error-checking mechanisms ensure near perfect fidelity for dna replication. dna polymerases are a family of enzymes that carry out all forms of dna replication. dna polymerases add nucleotides to the 3' end of a strand of dna. if a mismatch is accidentally incorporated, the polymerase is inhibited from further extension. proofreading removes the mismatched nucleotide and extension continues. transcription- transcription is the first step of gene expression, in which a particular segment of dna is copied into rna (messenger rna or mrna) by the enzyme rna polymerase. rna polymerase, and therefore the initiation of transcription, requires the presence of a core promoter sequence in the dna. promoters are regions of dna that promote transcription and, in eukaryotes, are found at -30, -75, and -90 base pairs upstream from the transcription start site. transcription factors are proteins that bind to these promoter sequences and facilitate the binding of rna polymerase. one strand of the dna, the template strand (also noncoding or antisense strand), is used as a template for rna synthesis. as transcription proceeds, rna polymerase traverses the template strand and uses base pairing complementarity with the dna template to create a n rna copy. although rna polymerase traverses the template str and from 3' 5', the coding (non - template or sense) strand and newly formed rna can also be used as reference points, so transcription can be described as occurring 5' 3'. this produces an rna molecule from 5' -> 3', an exact copy of the coding strand (except that thymines are replaced with uracils, and the nucleotides are composed of a ribose (5-carbon) sugar. structure of the genes the structure of a protein coding gene consists of many elements of which the actual protein coding sequence is often only a small part. these include dna regions that are not transcribed as well as untranslated regions of the rna. firstly, flanking the open reading frame, all genes contain regulatory sequence that is required for their expression. in order to be expressed, genes require a promoter sequence. the promoter is recognized and bound by transcription factors and rna polymerase to initiate transcription. additionally, genes can have regulatory regions many kilobases upstream or downstream of the open reading frame. these act by binding to transcription factors which then cause the dna to loop so that the regulatory sequence (and bound transcription factor) become close to the rna polymerase binding site. for example, enhancers increase transcription by binding an activator protein which then helps to recruit the rna polymerase to the promoter; conversely, silencers bind repressor proteins and make the dna less available for rna polymerase. the transcribed pre-mrna contains untranslated regions at both ends which contain a ribosome binding site, terminator and start and stop codons. in addition, most eukaryotic open reading frames contain untranslated introns which are removed before the exons are translated. the sequences at the ends of the introns, dictate the splice sites to generate the final mature mrna which encodes the protein or rna product. splicing is a modification of the nascent pre-mrna transcript in which introns are removed and exons are joined. for nuclear encoded genes, splicing takes place within the nucleus after or concurrently with transcription. alternative splicing is a regulated process during gene expression that results in a single gene coding for multiple proteins. in this process, particular exons of a gene may be included within or excluded from the final, processed messenger rna(mrna) produced from that gene. consequently, the proteins translated from alternatively spliced mrnas will contain differences in their amino acid sequence and, often, in their biological functions. notably, alternative splicing allows the human genome to direct the synthesis of many more proteins than would be expected from its 20,000 protein - coding genes. alternative splicing. because of this process, one gene can code for several proteins. the genetic code is the set of rules by which information encoded within genetic material (dna or mrna sequences) is translated into proteins by living cells. biological decoding is accomplished by the ribosome, which links amino acids in an order specified by mrna, using transfer rna (trna) molecules to carry amino acids and to read the mrna three nucleotides at a time. the genetic code is highly similar among all organisms and can be expressed in a simple table with 64 entries. the code defines how sequences of these nucleotide triplets, called codons, specify which amino acid will be added next during protein synthesis. with some exceptions, a three-nucleotide codon in a nucleic acid sequence specifies a single amino acid. because the vast majority of genes are encoded with exactly the same code, this particular code is often referred to as the canonical or standard genetic code, or simply the genetic code, though in fact some variant codes have evolved. for example, protein synthesis in human mitochondria relies on a genetic code that differs from the standard genetic code. translation starts with a chain initiation codon or start codon. the most common start codon is aug, which is read as methionine. the three stop codons have been given names: uag is amber, uga is opal (sometimes also called umber), and uaa is ochre. stop codons are also called "termination" or "nonsense" codons. they signal release of the nascent polypeptide from the ribosome because there is no cognate trna that has anticodons complementary to these stop signals, and so a release factor binds to the ribosome instead. degeneracy is the redundancy of the genetic code. the genetic code has redundancy but no ambiguity. for example, although codons gaa and gag both specify glutamic acid (redundancy), neither of them specifies any other amino acid (no ambiguity). translation: in translation, mrna is decoded by a ribosome to produce a specific amino acid chain, or polypeptide. the polypeptide later folds into an active protein and performs its functions in the cell. the ribosome facilitates decoding by inducing the binding of complementary transfer rna(trna) anticodon sequences to mrna codons. the trnas carry specific amino acids that are chained together into a polypeptide as the m rna passes through and is "read" by the ribosome. the entire process is a part of gene expression. after the translation, some proteins are modified through a process called post-translational modification. post-translational modification refers to the covalent and generally enzymatic modification of proteins during or after protein biosynthesis. post-translational modifications can occur on the amino acid side chains or at the protein's c- or n- termini. they can extend the chemical repertoire of the 20 standard amino acids by introducing new functional groups such as phosphate, acetate, amide groups, or methyl groups. other forms of post-translational modification consist of cleaving peptide bonds, as in processing a propeptide to a mature form or removing the initiator methionine residue. the formation of disulfide bonds from cysteine residues may also be referred to as a post-translational modification. for instance, the peptide hormone insulin is cut twice after disulfide bonds are formed, and a propeptide is removed from the middle of the chain; the resulting protein consists of two polypeptide chains connected by disulfide bonds. transmission of genetic information- cell cycle and regulation of cell cycle- in a given organism the genetic information (dna) is transferred from cell to cell during the cell cycle. in the cell cycle, the cellular content is duplicated then it is halved. however, a distinction must be drawn between the nuclear and cytoplasmic events. dna duplication (in chromatin form of dna) and halving (in chromosome form of dna) are very precisely regulated processes, resulting two genetically identical cells. at the same time, the growing of the cytoplasm followed by division in two are less strictly regulated events of cell cycle. the duplication of cellular ingredients occurs in interphase, that is divided into g1 (preduplication or preceding dna duplication), s (dna synthesis) and g2 (postduplication) phases. in m-phase the previously duplicated cellular content is separated, in mitosis the chromosomes, followed by cytokinesis, the division of cytoplasm. cell proliferation rate in an adult multicellular organism is variable. moreover, most of the cells are in so-called g0 phase, where there is no cell division, sometimes not even growth. the cells need extracellular stimuli, e.g. growth factors and/or adhesion to other cells or extracellular matrix in order to reenter g1 phase. in the cell cycle a very sophisticated control system (cell cycle control system) functions, whose essential components are the cyclin-dependent protein kinases, the cdk-s. cdk-s are activated by another protein family, by cyclins, the amount of which cyclically varies during the cell cycle. beside cyclins, the activity of cyclin- dependent kinases is regulated by other factors, too. these factors include activating and inhibiting cdk kinases which phosphorylate cdk-s, resulting cdk activation and inhibition, respectively. phosphate residues are removed by phosphatases, modifying cdk activity. according to their names, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors inhibit cdk activity. the amount of all the proteins mentioned before may be regulated via transcriptional and translational level and by proteasomal degradation, followed by ubiquitination. all these together allow a highly organized, complex but gentle control of the cell cycle. the cyclin-dependent kinases, the main actors of cell cycle control system, operate the cell cycle through phosphorylation of many different target proteins. recently, in addition to cyclin-dependent kinases, the role of some other kinases (e.g. polo, aurora etc.) was found. the phases of cell cycle are not interchangeable, they have to follow each other in a strict order. operation of checkpoints in the cell cycle ensures to give rise to genetically identical cells by cell cycle. phases (g1, s, g2, m) and checkpoints (g1, g2, m) of cell cycle. cell cycle control system allows to overstep checkpoints if the conditions are suitable for the cell to proceed to the next phase. the main checkpoints are the following: g1 checkpoint (in higher eukaryotes it is referred to as restriction point), where first of all the integrity of dna is checked, operates at the end of the g1 phase. the second checkpoint is at the end of g2 phase, it is the g2 checkpoint, where the accuracy and integrity of dna is monitored. finally, the function of m checkpoint, in the metaphase of mitosis is to ensure the appropriate attachment of all chromosomes to the microtubules of the mitotic spindle before the duplicated chromosomes are separated. multicellular (mammalian) cell cycle and the regulation. g0-g1 transition: in an adult multicellular organism most cells do not divide, they are found in a special phase, g0 phase. g0 phase cells lack functional cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases, the main cell cycle regulators. if proliferation is necessary, these g0 phase cells have to return into the cell cycle, essentially have to pass g1 checkpoint or restriction point. it is induced by growth factors or extracellular matrix components initiating transcription and translation of d cyclin and reduction of cdk inhibitors by stimulating their proteasomal degradation. these cdk inhibitors: p16, p1 5, p18 and p19 specifically inhibit cdk4 and cdk6 by preventing the binding of activating d cyclin, and also the activity of cdk-cyclin complex. the main target of active cdk4/6-d cyclin complex is prb (rb stands for retinoblastoma, a malignant disease of the retina caused by the mutation of prb encoding gene), p107 and p130 proteins. the phosphorylation of these proteins causes conformational changes, and they release e2f transcription factors. and it is the turning point in g0-g1 transition, because e2f transcription factors induce the transcription of several s-phase specific genes, such as e cyclin, a cyclin, thymidine kinase, dna polymerase etc. e cyclin activates cdk2 whose main target, similarly to the cdk4/6-d-cyclin is rb protein, the phosphorylation of which is enhanced (positive feedback). cdk2 has another activator, a cyclin, their complex is essential in s phase initiation. disadvantageous environmental effects, e.g. hypoxia (excessive proliferation of cells may result not sufficient blood flow) or dna damages activate g1 checkpoint machinery and it will stop the cell cycle. the amount and activity of p53 is increased which in turn induces the transcription of a cdk inhibitor protein, p21. p21 is a general cdk inhibitor, hence it inhibits all cdk-cyclin complexes: cdk4/6 – d cyclin, cdk2 – e cyclin and cdk2 – a cyclin, so the cell cycle is halted and the cell may not enter s phase. this general cdk inhibitor family has two other members, p27 and p57. these proteins prevent the duplication of damaged dna, suspend the cell cycle, allowing error correction. briefly, their activity prevents the cell cycle resulting genetically different cells. summary of g0-g1 transition: the cdk inhibitor encoding genes are tumor suppressor genes whose mutations in homozygote form (recessive) are the main contributors of tumor development. the most well-known tumor suppressor gene species are p53 and prb encoding genes. about half of the tumors lack functional p53. the genes encoding cell cycle stimulating proteins (cdk-s, cyclins, growth factors and many others) are protooncogenes. their mutation in heterozygote form (dominant) is also involved in tumor development. g1-s transition, s-phase: the main s phase event is the dna duplication, the replication. since eukaryotic cell dna is much higher than prokaryotic, the replication starts simultaneously at several sites, called origos, and occurs in both directions. initiation proteins associate with origos where dna unwinds, followed by the attachment of further components of replication complex. as throughout the whole cell cycle cyclin-dependent kinases play major role in g1-s transition, too. cdk2-e cyclin complex activation requires the degradation of the cdk inhibitor p27, which step is initiated by an ubiquitin ligase, scf (skp-cullin-f-box protein). finally, the activated cdk2 (and another protein kinase, cdc7) phosphorylate some, not exactly known members of the replication complex. this effect fulfills another role, too, namely it prevents the formation or the binding of new initiation complexes, and hence, the dna is replicated only once. in dna replication, both strands of dna serve as template, and appropriate nucleotides built in according to the complementarity of the nucleotide chain. as it was demonstrated by the experiments applying radioactive isotope labelled monomers, dna synthesis is semi-conservative, since after the replication both dna molecules have one old and a newly synthesized strand. since the sequence of dna strand unambiguously determines the sequence of complementer dna strand, the arising two dna molecules are equal. g2-m transition: the regulation of g2-m transition is better known than that of g1-s transition. the m-phase is triggered by mpf(m-phase or mitosis promoting factor), that is a complex of b cyclin and cdk1. after the binding of these proteins, post-translational modifications are required for the final activation. cdk1 component of the complex is the substrate of two kinases, one is an activating kinase which adds a phosphate group to a tyrosine, the other is an inactivating kinase which phosphorylates a threonine residue of the protein. the latter is removed by a phosphatase (product of a gene belonging to cdc25 gene family), and this is the last step in mpf activation. but all these events will only happen if g2 checkpoint machinery finds dna undamaged and correctly replicated. mpf activation. b cyclin binds to cdk1 which is phosphorylated by an activating and an inactivating kinase. inactivating phosphate group is cleaved by a phosphatase resulting an active mpf. mpf has numerous substrates, first of all it activates cdc25 protein, thus by a positive feedback control more and more mpf is activated. in mammalian cells there are three phosphatases: cdc25 a, b, and c, at this point of cell cycle regulation, the c type operates. then, mpf triggers m-phase through the phosphorylation of further target proteins, like lamin a, b, and c, components of nuclear lamin a, a structure attached to the inner nuclear membrane. it results disintegration of nuclear membrane. mpf indirectly inhibits actomyosin atp-ase activity causing rearrangement of microfilaments and consequently rounding of the cell and also inhibiting premature cytokinesis. one of the major events, the chromosome condensation is triggered also by mpf, through the phosphorylation of condensins, h1 and h3 histones. phosphorylation of map-s (microtubules associated proteins) changes the arrangement of microtubule system and induces mitotic spindle formation needed for chromosome separation. in g2-m phase transition the apc(anaphase promoting complex) having role later in metaphase-anaphase transition is indirectly activated by mpf. m-phase: the m-phase is a complex process of successive steps, a series of events, used to be divided into mitosis and cytokinesis. in the first half of the m-phase, in mitosis, the doubled dna divides in two, followed by the separation of cytoplasm, by the phase of cytokinesis. in mitosis the following phases are distinguished: prophase- in the nucleus the nuclear chromatin gradually changes to chromosomes by the maximal condensation of dna. since before the m-phase the dna has been replicated, each chromosome comprises two chromatids (sister chromatids). in the cytoplasm the centrosome, which also has been doubled in interphase, splits into two and move to opposite poles of the cell, and organize the mitotic spindle composed of microtubules. prometaphase- nucleolus disappears, the chromosome development continues. the nuclear membrane disintegrates, too. kinetochore microtubules binding kinetochore protein complex associate to the centromere region of each chromatid. metaphase- the chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane of the cell by the help of kinetochore microtubules. kinetochore regions face the two poles of the cell, and the kinetochore microtubules bind to sister chromatids of a chromosome from opposite direction. anaphase- sister chromatids of chromosomes split and move toward the poles of the cell. in the first half of anaphase (anaphase a), the kinetochore, later in the second half of anaphase (anaphase b), the polar microtubules operate. it is the shortest phase of mitosis. telophase- kinetochore microtubules disappear, nuclear membrane is reorganized around the chromatids at the cell poles. chromosomes decondense, they become chromatin. nucleoli are reformed. polar microtubules lengthen further the cell. the mitosis, the division of nuclear content is followed by: cytokinesis- the separation of the cytoplasm begins in the late anaphase and is completed after the telophase. in the middle of the cell, perpendicular to the axis of the mitotic spindle cleavage furrow appears which gradually deepens and thus the connection between the two half cells narrows. the overlapping region of polar microtubules makes so-called midbody. finally, the cytoplasm completely splits. chromosome structure: in m-phase, the long eukaryotic dna molecules have to be packed in small chromosomes to be able to accurately halve without breaks. meanwhile, the original length of the dna (several cm) is reduced by ten thousands fold (few m). the molecular mechanism of this packaging is still not known in detail. two nm wide dna double helix wraps the octamers of histones (2 of each h2a, h2b, h3 and h4 histone molecules) forming nucleosomes, disc-like structures connected by the continuous dna molecule. it is called nucleosomal structure having a diameter of 11 nm. h1 histone folds six nucleosomes in one plane to give a diameter of 30 nm fiber called chromatin or solenoid. the chromatin fiber is attached to a protein scaffold and forms loops. these loops are the basic unit of replication and transcription, and this structure is 300 nm wide. finally, it is further compressed and folded to produce the chromatids of 1400 nm wide metaphase chromosome. the final step of chromosome condensation is induced by the mpf activated condensins. there are two protein complexes of similar structure influencing different dna functions: the condensins and the cohesins. they are composed of different smc (structural maintenance of chromosomes) proteins having atpase activity and regulatory functions, all associate in a ring-like structure. metaphase chromosome has very characteristic morphological structure. as the dna is doubled in the s phase, chromosome comprises two sister chromatids. after dna synthesis, the dna molecules are held together by the ring-like cohesin complexes. much of this cohesins detaches during the prophase, and at the end of metaphase, it is found only at the primary constriction of chromosomes specified as centromere region. this peri-centromeric cohesin is cleaved in early anaphase allowing the separation of chromatids. chromosomes are usually classified according to the location of the centromere region. during prophase and prometaphase, a special three-layer plate of protein structure called kinetochore associates to the centromeres of chromosomes. beside many other proteins, kinetochore contains both dynein and kinesin-type motor proteins, and the role of it is to bind kinetochore microtubules (about 30 40/sister chromatids). in scleroderma, which is an autoimmune disease, patients produce antibodies against some of the kinetochore proteins. the centromere divides the sister chromatids into two arms, the ends of the arms are called telomeres. loss of telomeres makes the chromosomes instable. there are 5 pairs of human chromosomes having not only primary, but secondary constriction or nor (nucleolar organizer region) too, which contains a high number of copies of the large (45s) rrna gene. disappearance and re-formation of nuclear envelope: as it was mentioned before, the lamins of nuclear lamina attached to the inner surface of nuclear envelope are phosphorylated by mpf, causing the dissociation of nuclear membrane into vesicles. lamin b remains in the membrane of vesicles, but lamin a and c are found in soluble form in the cytoplasm. the highly organized nuclear pores are also decomposed. at the end of mitosis, in the telophase, the phosphatases are activated and dephosphorylate the lamins. the reformation of nuclear envelope begins on the surface of chromosomes. they move closer to each other, and the membranes fuse and the pores are also reorganized. finally, the chromosomes decondense to chromatin. structure and role of mitotic spindle: the components of mitotic spindle are the centrosomes and the microtubules. in human cells, the major microtubule organizer center (mtoc) is the centrosome; in interphase cells, it is located usually near to the nucleus. the structure of centrosome is the following: in the center, there are two perpendicular cylindrical bodies (the centrioles), which are connected by proteins at their bases. the centrioles are made of 9x3 microtubules in windmill-like arrangement. around them, an amorphous, unstructured material, the pericentriolar matrix is located, in which numerous different proteins are found. the microtubules grow out from the pericentriolar matrix in star-like manner, this region is called aster. minus ends of microtubules face the centrioles, their plus ends face outward. the microtubules are organized, the tubulin heterodimer polymerization is induced by a special subtype of tubulin, found in- tubulin rings in the pericentriolar matrix. schematic figure of centrosome: there are two centrioles in the center, surrounded by pericentriolar matrix (pcm) which is the nucleation site of microtubules (yturc=y tubulin ring complex). to produce genetically identical cells through the cell cycle not only the accurate replication and separation of dna, but the precise duplication and division of centrosome are needed. if there is no centrosome duplication, there is no bipolar mitotic spindle, no division and the chromosomes are not able to separate in two. however, if centrosome is repeatedly duplicated, more poles are made in the cells and the chromosomes are unevenly distributed between the daughter cells. in late g1 phase, the centrioles slightly move away from each other, and in the s-phase, perpendicularly to the original one the development of new centrioles begin. in late g2 and early mitosis. the two pairs of centrioles are separated from each other, migrate to the two poles of the cell by the help of microtubule system and motor proteins. at the poles, the new centrosomes nucleate the microtubules of mitotic spindle. mitotic spindle organization also needs the activation of mpf. at the beginning of division, the map-s microtubule associated proteins are phosphorylated by mpf, which in turn changes the characteristic interphase microtubule arrangement and induces the development of mitotic spindle. in interphase, there are few, long, and relatively stable microtubules. oppositely, the mitotic spindle is characterized by many, short and highly dynamic microtubules. in prophase, many dynamic microtubules grow in all directions back away from the centrosomes. the attachment to any structure by their + end stabilizes the microtubules. the microtubules growing from different poles may bind to each other giving rise to the partly overlapping polar microtubules. in the overlapping region + end motor proteins are found, which stabilize the polar microtubules and are also needed to push apart the two poles in anaphase b. in prometaphase, after the disruption of nuclear envelope the microtubules randomly may bind not only to each other, but also to the chromosomes. it has been demonstrated that the chromosomes by their kinetochore region move on the microtubules. this movement is a kind of sliding mediated by dynein motor protein. around the centrosome, the effect of a special unidentified force, referred as polar wind is noticed. it means that from the poles of the cell, all bigger particles are excluded, probably due to the mechanical effect of intensively growing microtubules. as they grow, they may push any particles, e.g. chromosomes. at the same time, the + ends of microtubules randomly growing from the two opposite poles may bind to the two different kinetochores of chromosomes. these microtubules are the kinetochore microtubules. in the metaphase, the chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane by the help of kinetochore microtubules. this arrangement is not static, the chromosomes are oscillating according to the dynamism of microtubules. at the same time, the length of microtubules is constant, because the rate of polymerization on both ends is the same. the third type of microtubules are the astral ones, they grow from the centrosome toward the plasma membrane. the role of them is not clear. metaphase-anaphase transition: in metaphase-anaphase transition, the anaphase promoting complex (apc) has to be activated. apc is a specific ubiquitin ligase, an enzyme which binds ubiquitin to its substrate proteins, targeting them to proteasomal degradation. one of the main substrates is the separase inhibitor, the securin. destruction of securin activates separase, which in turn, cleaves the sister chromatid binding cohesin from the chromosomes, allowing the pulling of sister chromatids to the poles by kinetochor microtubules. the other substrate is the b cyclin, and its degradation inactivates mpf. inactivation of mpf triggers the completion of m-phase; disappearance of mitotic spindle, chromosome decondensation, reorganization of nuclear envelope and the cytokinesis, too. in the metaphase m(spindle)-checkpoint machinery operates; briefly, its significance is to ensure the precise halving of chromosomes, pulling one sister chromatid to one pole and the other one to the other pole. the accurate segregation of sister chromatids is ensured by amphitelic attachment. if the attachment is not correct, the kinetochore microtubules are not bound to the sister chromatids of a chromosome from opposite poles, there are free kinetochores, the apc remains inactive and the mitosis is stopped in metaphase until the attachment is corrected. the colchicine causing disruption of microtubules stops the division in this way. if the chromosomes are arranged correctly in the metaphase, apc is activated and the cell may step the anaphase. in anaphase, two subphases are distinguished according to the type of microtubules operating. in anaphase a, the kinetochore microtubules shorten by depolymerization on both ends. the depolymerization is coupled to the movement of the chromosome, the sister chromatids are pulled to the opposite poles of the cell. the poles are further separated in anaphase b by the help of polar microtubules which are growing, but the overlapping region remains constant. consequently, the sister chromatids are further separated. cytokinesis: the division of cytoplasm is carried out by other components of the cytoskeleton than the separation of chromosomes, but the two cytoskeletal systems are not independent. the site of cytoplasmic cleavage is denoted by the mitotic spindle. asymmetric positioned mitotic spindle results in asymmetric cytokinesis, in different sized cells. in late anaphase (anaphase b), after the migration of two sister chromatids to the poles beneath the plasma membrane, perpendicularly to the mitotic spindle axis, a contractile ring composed of actin and myosin ii filaments is formed. the regulation of contractile ring development is not exactly known, but the role of kinases and monomeric g-proteins is suspected. the sliding of actin and myosin filaments on each other eventually leads to the progressive cleavage of the cell. finally, below the contractile ring, the two cells are only connected by the so-called midbody. the new cell membranes develop by the fusion of vesicles, which transport probably takes place along the microtubules of midbody. operation of cell cycle checkpoints: the checkpoint machinery is composed of three main components which make up a cascade. the sensor detects the errors occurring in dna molecules, this signal is transmitted to a transducer, which finally triggers effector proteins. in g1 and g2 checkpoints, the dnadamages, for example the single-stranded dna, or double strand breaks are recognized by certain proteins which activate transducers. the activated transducers, which are protein kinases (not cyclin dependent) phosphorylate, e.g. in g1 checkpoint, the p53 protein. this phosphorylation stabilizes p53 and stops the cell cycle. so, in g1 checkpoint, the effector protein is p53. in g2 checkpoint, cdc25 is the effector molecule. in the case of dna damage, the transducer inactivates cdc25 by phosphorylation, that is why the inactive cdc25 is not able to activate mpf by the cleavage of inactivation phosphate group, so the cell cycle is stopped before m-phase. in the m checkpoint, the sensor proteins bind to free kinetochores of chromosomes. however, these proteins recruit a protein which is required for the apc function, so in the case of free kinetochores apc is not functional; the cell is retained in metaphase. obviously, the precise operation of checkpoint machinery is more complex than it has been described before; the details are being discovered nowadays. anyway, its accurate function is essential to give rise to genetically identical cell by cell cycle. the failure of sufficient regulation or checkpoint machinery may result in atypical divisions. although some of these atypical divisions, depending on the species and cell type is not necessarily abnormal, but the majority of them is characteristic of tumor cells. of course, from each of atypical proliferation genetically diverse cells are originated. in endomitosis, the nuclear envelope remains intact, therefore, the amount of cellular dna content increases. in parallel with the size of the nucleus and the whole cell enlarges, too, so giant cells are formed. the sister chromatid separation inside the intact nuclear causes the increase in chromosome number of the cell, these are referred to as polyploid cells. if sister chromatids remain together, it leads to the formation of giant chromosomes (polytene) composed of many sister chromatids instead of two. failure of cytokinesis results in giant cells, too, but these cells have more nuclei. many division abnormalities are caused by the mitotic spindle defects. the normal division is bipolar due to the precise duplication and separation of centrosomes. abnormalities either in the duplication or the separation of centrosomes may cause so-called multipolar divisions, depending on the number of poles: tri-, tetra-, etc. polar divisions. the consequence of non-disjunction of sister chromatids of a chromosome can be easily calculated, it leads to the change of chromosome number (aneuploidy) in both cells, in one of them one more and in the other one less chromosome is found. the reason for such a defect is the syntelic or monotelic kinetochore - microtubule attachment. however, the merotelic attachment may result in bridge formation (or anaphase bridge because it becomes visible in anaphase). first, the sister chromatid to which microtubules bind from both poles make a kind of bridge but later it more probably breaks. the breakage of chromosomes leads to structural chromosomal abnormalities. the chromosome fragment without centromere is excluded from the nucleus and makes a so-called micronucleus in the cytoplasm. this phenomenon is used in mutagenicity assays to detect compounds which cause/increase chromosomal breakages. chromosome territories: while chromosomes appear as condensed, elongated structures during the process of cell division, for most of the lifetime of a cell, chromosomes do not look anything like this. so, the question is what chromosomes look like in the nucleus of a cell between cell divisions? it was the fish technique that has revealed how chromosomes look like during the interphase of the cell cycle. it turned out that among the several models suggested previously, the chromosome territory model proved to be the right one. although there are still a lot of open questions a few topics have already been clarified: chromosome territories are irregular in shape but typically about 1 to 2 micrometers in diameter, and they consist of smaller subdomains. chromosome territories border each other closely; the neighboring chromosomes can invade the territories of each other and intermingle at their peripheries. chromosome territories are known to be arranged radially around the nucleus. chromosome territories are semiconserved from parent to daughter cell during cell division, with locations in the daughter cell similar to those in the parent cell. patterns of chromosome arrangement are specific to both cell type and tissue type. the organization of interphase chromosome territories changes during differentiation, quiescence, and senescence. the gene - rich chromosomes are present in the nuclear interior while gene - poor chromosomes are located at the periphery. regions of dna that are within the nuclear interior show higher transcriptional activity. group of genes with common tasks are in the vicinity of each other and are under coordinated regulation. loops may carry genes to even very remote sites in the nuclear space for coregulation in an expression hub. chromosome territories are also dynamic structures, with genes able to relocate from the periphery towards the interior once they have been switched on. in other cases, genes may move in the opposite direction, or simply maintain their position. chromosome territories can reposition in diseases, which might provide novel insights into disease mechanisms and why genes are incorrectly expressed in diseases. in summary, this functional compartmentalization of the chromosomes makes possible: coordinated functioning of the dna packed in the nucleus; synchronized switching off and on of hundreds/thousands of genes coordinated functioning of genes working for common aims fine-tuning of the regulation of gene-gene interactions organized transportation of gene products separation of active genes from the inactive ones.  inter- and intrachromosomal loops in the regulation of gene expression: loops may carry genes to remote sites in the nuclear space for coregulation in an expression hub. meiosis: there are two forms of genetic information transmission from one generation to the next one. firstly, asexual reproduction, which is typical for the lower organisms evolved. it is a simple process, the offspring develop from the somatic cells of a single parent, thus they are genetically identical to the parent organism. in sexual reproduction, the offspring have mixed genome of two parents, so they are genetically different from both parents and from each other. sexual reproduction has a great evolutionary advantage for the species, because the individuals gain high genetic variability allowing the adaptation to the unexpected circumstances. sexual reproduction is crucial for the survival of species. in sexually reproducing organisms, there are two successive generations of cells: the diploid somatic cells give rise to haploid cell by meiosis and the haploid cells, which are reduced to gametes in animals. the species-specific chromosome number is restored by the fusion of gametes resulting diploid zygote, and the life of a new individual starts. how these haploid cells are formed in meiosis? the essence of the process is double: on one hand the chromosome number is halved, secondly the parental genetic information is mixed. phases of meiosis: in meiosis there are two successive divisions: meiosis I and meiosis ii. similarly to mitosis, in meiosis i, prophase the chromosomes are condensed, the nucleolus and the nuclear envelope disappear. the main event of this phase is the homologous recombination, the exchange of sequences of paired homologous chromosomes (maternal and paternal chromosomes of the same size and shape and having the same genes). it is the longest phase of meiosis which is divided into five substages: leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis. in leptotene, the two sister chromatids (having identical dna due to duplication in s-phase) containing chromosomes are very thin fiber-like structures, which randomly bind by their both ends to the nuclear envelope. later, they move to a distinct point of nuclear envelope, close to centrosome, forming a bouquet-like structure. thus, the homologous chromosomes are close to each other, which is necessary for the next stage process. in zygotene, the pairing, also known as synapse, of homologous chromosomes begins. recent studies have shown that even before the pairing, probably in early leptotene the double stranded dna-s break at several hundred sites. the pairing of homologous chromosomes is helped by a ladder-like protein structure, by the synaptonemal complex. it has lateral, transversal filaments, the overlapping transversal filaments form the central region of the structure. structure of synaptonemal complex- it keeps together the homologous chromosomes (bivalent, tetrads) like a zip. due to dna condensation, chromosomes become thicker and more visible, and the synapses are completed in pachytene. after pairing, they form structures composed of two chromosomes, maternal and paternal one (bivalent), both having two sister chromatids (tetrad). the tight binding between the homologous chromosomes leads to apparent decrease in number of chromosomes (pseudoreduction). the majority of double-stranded dna breaks are repaired, but at some of them homologous recombination (crossing-over), exchange of corresponding chromatids occur. this process is mediated by the recombination nodules, large 100 nm sized multi-enzyme complexes, which appear on the synaptonemal complex. the detailed molecular mechanism of crossing over is not discussed here. the crossing over may occur between any chromatids, but it results new combination of genes if it happens between non-sisters. the number of crossing overs between non-sister chromatids of a chromosome pair is 1-3. there is compulsory recombination even between the basically not homologous x and chromosomes at their pseudoautosomal regions (par). checkpoint machinery controls the appearance and the process of crossing over, underlining the significance of homologous recombin6ation. in diplotene stage the synaptonemal complex largely detaches, thus the members of homologous pairs may slightly mov e away from each other, so the chromosomes are linked only at the sites of crossing overs, referred as chiazmata. finally, in diakinesis the homologous separation continues, but the bivalents are still connected at chiazmata, found between sister chromatid s of homologous chromosomes, and also by aploid s which held together sister chromatids of a chromosome. later, the aploid s dissociate from the arms and keep the chromatids together only at centromeric regions. during the prophase, kinetochore region develops on chromosomes, but in contrast to mitosis, both kinetochores of a chromosome face one pole, while the kinetochore of the homologous face opposite -in first division metaphase, not the single chromosomes, but the chromosome pairs are arranged in the equatorial plane, whereas the chiazmata still connect the homologs. chiazmata only disappear at the end of metaphase. -in the anaphase the kinetochore microtubules pull the homologous chromosomes and not the chromatids toward the poles, since the kinetochores of a chromosome face the same pole. thus, the synapses not only allow the cross-over , but also needed to halve the number of chromosomes. the separation of homologous, which member of a pair is pulled to a given pole is a random process. it increases further the genetic variation. in human it is 2^23. in telophase, the nuclear membrane is reorganized, and the cytoplasm splits. arising cells are haploid, that is why the first division of meiosis is called reduction division. the chromosomes are still composed of two sister chromatids, which will separate in the following part, in meiosis ii. the first division is followed by a short interphase, in which there is no dna replication. second division of meiosis is also divided into pro-, meta-, ana-, and telophase, but these phases are essentially very similar to the phases of mitosis. thus, in metaphase the single chromosomes are arranged in the equatorial plane, and in the anaphase, the sister chromatids of the chromosomes are separated. the orientation of kinetochores is also similar to mitosis. in the telophase, the nuclear envelopes are reorganized, two nuclei are formed and then the cytoplasms are also halved. finally, the meiosis results from a diploid cell four haploid cells, the gametes. after the fusion of two haploid cells, in the zygote chromosome number of the species is reconstituted. at the same time, the genetic information of the gametes is different caused by the homologous recombination in meiosis i prophase and the random assortment of homologous in meiosis i anaphase. these processes provide high genetic variability needed for the survival of the species. the most frequent abnormality of meiosis is the non-disjunction either in meiosis i or ii. obviously, non-disjunction of both the homologous chromosomes (in the first division), and the sister chromatids (in the second division) alters the chromosome number of resulting gametes. involvement of such gametes in fertilization may lead to so-called aneuploid genome mutation in vertebrates, the gamete formation is a complex process, the meiosis is only a part of it. at the very beginning of ontogeny primordial germ cells migrate to the developing gonads. several mitotic divisions are followed by meiosis, and finally in male gametogenesis a differentiation step gives rise to mature gametes. oogenesis: in most animals, the female gamete (egg) is very large compared to somatic cells. eggs contain yolk: different nutrients (lipids, proteins, carbohydrates) sufficient for the early development of embryo, until self-feeding will be able. although the egg of mammals contains small amount of yolk (oligolecithal), it is much bigger than the body cells of the organism. the size of a human egg is about 100 m. in developing gonads of embryo the primordial germ cells (46 chromosomes) develop to oogonia (46 chromosomes) which divide by mitosis. the cell entering the first meiotic division is primary oocyte (46 chromosomes). meiosis i is halted, the cells may remain in prophase diplotene stage for decades. meanwhile, a coat, the zona pellucida develops around them, and in the cytoplasm cortical granules accumulate, which content is released after the sperm penetration, preventing the penetration of further sperms. from the puberty due to hormonal effects, cyclically one cell resumes meiosis i. division of the cytoplasm is asymmetric, the larger cell is the secondary oocyte (23 chromosomes), whereas the smaller cell is polocyte (or polar cell, also has 23 chromosomes). the unequal cytokinesis is likely provided by the asymmetric mitotic spindle position. secondary oocyte continues meiosis, enters meiosis ii but it is halted in the metaphase. secondary oocyte is ovulated in this stage. the completion of meiosis ii is triggered by the penetration of sperm, the fertilization. the meiosis ii results a fertilized ovum which contains two pronuclei (23-23 chromosomes) and a polocyte (23 chromosomes). the polocyte derived from the first divison may divide, too, but the studies usually demonstrate the presence of only two polocytes. polocyte: derived from the first division is termed primary, the other derived from the second division is termed secondary polocyte. spermatogenes is while in most species the egg is the largest cell, not capable of independent movement, the other gamete, the sperm is the smallest cell and is able to move. in male organism, primordial germ cells (46 chromosomes) migrate into developing testis where they become spermatogonia (46 chromosomes) in the external wall of testis. from the puberty, spermatogonia divide continuously by mitosis. a group of them enters meiosis i; these are the primary spermatocytes (46 chromosomes). meiosis i gives rise to two haploid cells, called secondary spermatocytes (23 chromosomes). the second meiotic division makes for haploid round, immobilized cells, called spermatids (23 chromosomes). in both divisions, the cytokinesis is incomplete, the secondary spermatocytes and spermatids, too, are connected to each other by cytoplasmic bridge. after meiosis differentiation process, cytological morphogenesis begins, which results in actively motile sperms. this step is called spermiohistogenesis, which happens embedded in sertol i cells. from sertoli cells, the sperms are placed in the lumen of testis. the typical structure of differentiated sperms (head, midpiece and tail part) serves only one purpose, to safely convey dna content to the egg. the head contains the nucleus where dna is in completely heterochromatic form to occupy the smallest space. protamines being more positively charged proteins than histones are needed for dna to be packed so condense. in front of the nucleus, a giant secretory vesicle, acrosome is located. the acrosome vesicle containing hydrolytic enzymes is responsible for dissolving the different coats of eggs during fertilization. in the midpiece fused mitochondria are located, forming so-called mitochondrial sheath, where atp necessary for the movements of the sperm is produced. the tail essentially is a flagellum composed of 9x2+2 microtubule system, additionally at the periphery there are nine dense keratin containing fibrils whose function is still not clear. recent studies have demonstrated the differences of spermatogenesis or oogenesis regarding the meiosis i prophase. regulation of meiosis: the regulation of meiotic division has primarily been studied in amphibian and fish oogenesis. firstly, mpf itself has been found to be the regulator of amphibian oogenesis, and only later was discovered that it was equal to m-phase or mitosis triggering factor (mpf), which is composed of cdk1 and cyclin b. there are crucial differences in the process of oogenesis and spermatogenesis, consequently in the regulation, too. the first difference is the start time of meiosis. the oogenesis begins in early embryonic life, the spermatogenesis in puberty. it has been demonstrated that retinoic acid is responsible for meiotic trigger. retinoic acid that is spermatogenesis oogenesis initialization of the process during life puberty second month of the embryonic life halted in the diplotene stage of meiosis i in the fifth month rhythm of the process continuous, without interruption cyclic from the puberty: monthly one oocyte pro ovum continues meiosis, enters meiosis ii but it is halted in the metaphase, completion of meiosis ii is triggered by the fertilization time required for gamete formation 60-65 days even 50 years. from the beginning of the  fifth month of the embryonic life, the homologues in the primary oocytes are held together at the chiasmata, effectiveness of the regulatory mechanism elimination of faulty spermatocytes by effective meiotic checkpoint control system the checkpoint control system of the meiotic spindle formation is less effective leading to an increased risk of nondisjunction and aneuploidies result of gametogenesis 4 equivalent sperms one oocyte+2 polocytes cell number at fertilization 15-150 million sperms/ ejaculation one (two) oocyte(s)/month termination of the process during life continues for a lifetime terminates at menopause metabolized by cyp26b1 is produced in both sexes embryo. since the amount and the activity of cyp26b1 is higher in male than in female embryo, retinoic acid is degraded in males, but in females as a signal induces the expression and effect of stra8 transcriptional factor. in oogonia stra8 triggers the meiosis. the meiosis i starts but stops in prophase diplotene stage. the elevation of camp has been detected in primary oocyte, which in turn inactivates mpf via protein kinase a. from puberty camp decreases cyclically in a primary oocyte, indirectly activating mpf, needed to continue meiosis i. the second arrest of the meiosis is in the metaphase of meiosis ii. the role of a not precisely identified protein, called cytostatic factor (cfs) is assumed. it is under the regulation of mos protooncogene (serine/threonine kinase) and inhibits apc activity via mapk pathway. in the case fertilization the ca ion level is elevated that is needed for the reactivation of apc. the activated apc induces the degradation of b cyclin and securin in the proteasome. the not inhibited separase may separate cohesin from the centromeres of chromosomes, allowing the sister chromatid separation in anaphase. lack of b cyclin inactivates mpf and the cell, which is already the zygote, may complete the division. then, the zygote starts segmentation (cleavage) which is characterized by a special, so-called embryonic cell cycle. in embryonic cell cycle there is no g1 and g2, consequently cell growth, the cell size gradually decreases. embryonic cell cycle is regulated by the same mpf, which controlled the meiosis. genetic variations: mutation and polymorphism- according to the classic definition, mutations are sudden heritable changes in the dna. the process (change) itself is still called mutation, but due to the fast development of genetics and genomics, two terms related to the variations in the sequence had to be modified. next to the above-mentioned definition the term mutation is also used to indicate a disease-causing change or sometimes rare change. similarly, the term polymorphism is used both to indicate a non-disease-causing change, or a change found at a frequency of 1% or higher in the population. in the era of advanced dna sequencing tools and personal genomics, these earlier definitions of mutation and polymorphism are antiquated. the 1% or higher frequency associated with a polymorphism is an arbitrary number and in addition, there are examples that variations with >1% frequencies can cause diseases. for instance, sickle-cell anemia is caused by a nucleotide change whose frequency is >1% in a gene coding for the beta chain of the hemoglobin protein. the disease manifests in people who have two copies of the mutated gene. to prevent this confusion, a new usage of these terms is suggested. it is proposed that in most cases, instead of mutation and polymorphism neutral terms like "sequence variant", "alteration" and "allelic variant" should be used. the term mutation may be used to indicate the result of a recent mutation event which has been detected using as a reference the germline dna of the same individual. therefore, a mutation would be a dna variant acquired over the lifetime of an organism, i.e. a somatic mutation. in this sense, mutations are the principal causes of many diseases like cancer but are typically not inherited by their offspring. alterations in the dna of germ cells sperms and eggs can be inherited by offspring and are currently called germline mutations. in this case, the term mutation should be used only if the germline variant has been detected using as a reference the germline dna of the same individual. in the case, a sequencing project did not include as a reference the germ-line dna of an individual, the term mutation could not be used and should be replaced by the neutral term variant. therefore, in the sequencing report the alternative use of the term mutation or variant will also clarify which kind of reference was adopted. importantly, the term polymorphism should only be used in the context of a population. accordingly, this term cannot be approved to classify variants in personal genomics. the classification of mutations: to evaluate mutations, it is crucial to know where, in what cell types they occur. somatic mutation is formed in a given somatic cell, and when this cell divides successively the mutation is transmitted to the offspring, so a mutation carrying cell clone is formed. depending on the time of the mutation, whether it is formed earlier or later in ontogeny, the number of cells involved, and the size of mutant clones will differ. a classic example of somatic mutations when one of the eyes is blue, the other is brown. then the mutation occurred after the separation of the eye primordium. the other situation is when brown spots can be seen in a blue eye; in this case the mutation took place after the development of the two separate eyes. somatic mutations in natural conditions-except the vegetative propagation of plants-are not passed on to offspring. however, the medical significance is not negligible, since somatic mutations may also play a role in tumorigenicity. according to knudson's hypothesis (two hit theory) for the development of certain cancers affecting tumor suppressor genes, two successive mutations are required. the tumor suppressor gene mutations are recessive, so two mutant copies are necessary for the complete loss of function, and then the tumor formation. one is usually inherited, while other is formed only in one or certain organs such the previous heterozygous state is lost and the homozygosity of the mutant tumor suppressor gene leads to tumor formation. the phenomenon is called loss of heterozygosity=loh, and by using modern molecular biological methods, it may be suitable for the detection of pre-cancerous conditions. germline mutations occurring in primordial germ cells or in germ cells during gametogenesis are inherited to the offspring, and therefore they have crucial importance in medicine. according to their origin there are spontaneous, due to defective dna replication, and induced mutations caused by various environmental effects (radiation, chemicals, etc.). the mutation frequency depends on the evolutionary level, since in prokaryotes in the absence of dna repair the mutation rate is much higher than eukaryotes. accordingly, high mutation frequency was observed in mitochondria with its prokaryotic-like dna. this is about ten times (!) higher than the mutation rate of the nuclear dna, which is about 10-5 per gene per generation. the most frequent spontaneous mutations are: 1/deaminations or 2/depurinations 1/ during deamination cytosine is converted to uracil, and adenine to hypoxanthine; 2/ during depurination the sugar-phosphate backbone of dna remains intact, but the purine base, e.g. guanine is lost, so it will be a toothless dna, so a gap is formed in the dna strand. the frequency of spontaneous mutations is influenced by the cell or tissue type, rapidly proliferating cells and tissues carry more spontaneous mutations, as the higher the rate of dna duplication, the greater the chance of erroneous incorporation of nucleotides. the best-known induced mutation is the uv radiation-induced one. the uv radiation induces dimerization of thymine, this distorts the dna, interferes with dna replication and transcription. similarly, incorporation of certain base analogues as 5 bromodeoxyuridine (brd u) during dna replication and the subsequent incorrect dna repair, results in a change in the original sequence. alkylating compounds (ems=ethyl-methane-sulfonate, mnu=methyl-nitroso-urea) attaches ethyl or methyl groups to certain dna bases like guanine, and thus o6-methylguanine arises. this causes mutation because o6-methylguanine pairs thymine instead of cytosine, therefore following the methylation of dna bases in the subsequent replication another base will be incorporated into the newly synthesized strand, so the mutation is fixed. intercalating compounds (proflavin, acridine orange) either merge in to the dna strand between bases , or create dna loops which in future replication and repair processes will lead to shorter dna (deletion) or to dna lengthening (duplication). some carcinogens (e.g. benzo(a)pyrene) connects larger molecules to the dna, so-called adducts are created. the mutations were also classified according to the degree of change caused in the dna. thus, we can talk about gene mutation- this is sometimes called point mutation, chromosome mutation when the lesion involves several genes, and genome mutation, which can affect the entire genetic material. gene mutations gene mutations can affect a single base of a gene- this is called point mutation in narrow sense- and may affect a greater or lesser portion of the gene. a single base limited mutation can be addition, deletion, or base substitution. if the number of bases added or deleted is not equal to three or a whole number multiple of it (6, 9, 12 etc.), a so-called frame-shift mutation is created. this means that downstream from the mutation site the transcriptional reading of the coded information is changed. if 3 or 6, 9, etc. is the number of bases inserted or eliminated, so in frame mutation occurs, only the affected section of information content changes the rest of the genes does not. there are two additional opportunities in base substitution, the transition and the transversion. in the first case a purine is replaced by another purine base or a pyrimidine base by another pyrimidine e.g. a->g or c->t. in the latter case, a purine base is exchanged by a pyrimidine base or vice versa a pyrimidine by a purine. the effects of substitution mutations are more varied. there is missense, nonsense and silent or sense mutations. following a missense mutation, the codon changes, and thus a different amino acid is incorporated into the protein, e.g. the mutation causing sickle cell anemia, wherein base exchange results in the incorporation of valine in place of glutamine as 6th amino acid in b-globin chain of hemoglobin. due to a nonsense mutation, the original codon changes to stop codon, so early termination of the protein chain, and a shorter protein molecule will be the result. in the case of silent or sense mutation due to degenerated genetic code, although the codon changes, the same amino acid is incorporated into a protein, so the mutation has no consequences. this mainly occurs when the 3rd and 2nd base of the codon is replaced by another one. whereas, during a cell's life dna replicates several times and may be repeatedly exposed to mutagenic agents several- even different types- mutations may occur. some of the recurrent mutations affect the part is already mutated, restoring the original sequence. then a so-called back or reverse mutation takes pace, and thus the potentially harmful consequences of the first mutation are eliminated. there is another possibility to apparently eliminate the consequence of a mutation. in prokaryotes, it has been observed that although the dna mutated, different amino acid was not built into the protein. it turned out that in this case trna also mutated and yet it delivered the original amino acid to the altered m rna codon. such trna is called suppressor trna. if the mutation affected an extended sequence (any number of bases) in the gene, then gene deletion, addition, or when the given sequence is reversed, gene inversion takes place. longer deletions may also affect not only one gene, but either gene families, (where genes with similar but not identical function, derived from an ancestral gene, are located directly one after the other in the dna). such is the case of deletions affecting globin gene families in various hemoglobin disorders (hemoglobinopathies), for example in thalassemias (its mutation mechanism is discussed at mutation hot spots). of course, the longer the lesion, the more severe the consequences, that is the more wrong, altered or functionless the protein product as well. a special case of gene mutations, namely the additions is, when alu sequences or line elements are integrated into the coding region of a gene by transposition or retrotransposition. then the addition of the jumping element (transposon or retroposon) breaks the original exon sequence, and thus leads to rna and protein formation of altered information content. in the case of hemophilia a addition of an alu sequence causes the disease. similarly, gene duplication due to recombination results in mutation as well. it occurs either in meiosis, when unequal crossing over between non-sister chromatids leads to gene duplication, or in mitosis, when rarely mitotic recombination (crossing-over) takes place between sister chromatids. in the latter case, it is a somatic mutation, and may lead to tumorigenesis by creating such daughter cells, where in one of them the heterozygosity is lost. (in the other daughter cell three copies of the gene are present, where gene duplication is in one of the homologous chromosomes while the other homologue is with a single locus of the given gene). the so-called mutational hot spots should be mentioned here. individual dna sequences, genes more likely mutate, where repetitive sequences are found. these repeats may interfere with the replication and meiotic pairing of the homologous chromosomes. the replication abnormality has physical causes: symmetrical or repetitive sequences located on the same strand of unwound dna can pair on the basis of complementarity or can form loops, and thus disturb the function of enzymes involved in replication and repair. for example, in hemophilia b, where large direct sequences with cg repeats occur in the factor ix. coding gene, there are 10 to 100 times more mutations. this higher mutation frequency may be attributable to epigenetic causes as well. methylated cytosine easily deaminates to thymine, thus leading to a ct transition on one strand and a ga transition on the other. the above-mentioned uneven crossing (see chapter 4, cytogenetics) can explain the repetition of larger sequences, sometimes of entire genes. for this phenomenon, a good example is the formation of- thalassemia. normally, both homologs of chromosome 16 contain two-globin genes one after the other. the uneven crossing over can result in gametes, which for example contain 1, or 3-globin genes. following the fertilization of such zygotes may be formed in which one more or one less-globin genes are present. the person's health depends on the number of-globin genes: 0 copy- intrauterine lethality, 1 copy- severe anemia, 2 copies- mild anemia, three copies- asymptomatic carrier can be the consequence. today, more than 30 diseases are known, which are caused by uneven crossing over (e.g. red-green color blindness). not only the direct repeats, but palindromic sequences (sequences of which base sequence in 5'-3' direction is the same on both strands) can frequently lead to additions and deletions. a special type of gene mutations are the repeat mutations where different numbers of nucleotides are repeated forming so called repetitive units. beside the best known trinucleotide repeat mutations there are other length mutations involving up to 24 nucleotides long units, thus resulting in the accumulation of e.g. octapeptide units in the protein (creutzfeldt-jakob disease). several types of trinucleotide repeat mutations are known. polyglutamine diseases associated with the expansion of cag triplets (cag is the code of glutamine). the currently known cag trinucleotide repeat mutations results in severe neurological diseases, so-called neurodegenerative disorders, but numbers of disease-causing repeats are different. in the case of huntington's chorea and kennedy disease, repeats affect the protein coding region of the gene. another large group of known trinucleotide repeat mutations are the polyalanine diseases in which gcn triplets (n can be any nucleotide) are accumulated, causing alanine accumulation in the protein. they are mainly transcription factor affecting mutations which generally lead to developmental malformation syndromes such as synpolydactylia or hand-food-genital syndrome. while the aforementioned trinucleotide repeats are in the coding regions of the genes, in the case of myotonic muscular dystrophy and fragile x syndrome, the repeats are in the untranslated region = utr, and generally the number of repeats is larger as well. it is typical for the repeat mutations that the diseases are caused only above a certain number of repeats, so there is a so-called premutation state, and that the repeat expansion (the increase in the repeat number) takes place during meiosis. the increase in the number of repeats (e.g. cag) is the result of a process (already mentioned at the mutation hot spots), when during the replication one of the dna strands is looped due to the repetitive sequences. if this looping affects the newly synthetized strand, the replication apparatus can detect it as if the replication had not been completely carried out from the template strand, so more repeat units are added to the new strand. this phenomenon is called replication skipping. with this the new strand contains several new repeat units as well. the old and the new strands are different in length, and then the repair mechanism corrects it by adding a sufficient number of new repeats to the old strand. the opposite phenomenon also exists- that may decrease the number of repeats. in this case looping affects the template strand, i.e. the newly synthetized strand will be shorter than the original was. however, in this case the repair will correct the error, too, i.e. the unnecessary number of repeats will be cut out from the old strand, so eventually there will be a dna molecule containing fewer repeat units. since dna replication takes place before mitosis and meiosis and, in principle, the repeat number can change in both cases. in contrast, in the case of gcn trinucleotide repeats the change in the repeat number is rather explained by a meiotic event namely by uneven crossing over. since the number of repeats varies from generation to generation, the repeat mutations are not stable and therefore they are recently also called dynamic mutations. in the case of prokaryotes, this dynamism has an important role in counteracting with the effects of the host's immune system; in eukaryotes, it may play a role in tumorigenicity. the role of repeat mutations that cause disease is easy to see, since with the addition of increased number of repeats into the coding sequence, with this expansion, the structure of the gene involved will be more and more distorted, therefore the protein is coded by it becomes more and more altered and no n-functioning. there is a phenomenon called anticipation- long been known in human genetics but cannot be explained for a long time. anticipation means that a hereditary disease transmitted from generation to generation will appear in younger and younger age and in more and more severe form. since the repeat expansions of medical importance takes place especially in meiosis (or in the previous s phase), and the gene in question will be increasingly damaged by this process, the above-mentioned phenomenon is well explained. in case of gene mutations, not only the size of the mutation, the length of the dna sequence in question is important, but in eukaryotes, including humans the place of mutation is important as well. it is not all the same whether a mutation is in a coding or non-coding region or in an untranslated region, in an exon or an intron, or even in the border between them. in the latter case, so-called splicing mutations can be formed, because the exon-intron boundary sequences play an important role in the intron looping, in the lariat format ion thereby, in spliceosome function. as a consequence of splicing mutations an exon is lost, or an intron can be translated, and a definitely defective protein will be the end result. even mutations of a single gene, which occur at various places, or base exchanges or splicing mutations can cause symptoms of completely different diseases, or symptoms of different severity as it is known for a large number of mutations in cystic fibrosis. the role of the utr mutations had not been understood till the past few years, since at first glance we might think that a mutation affecting the non - coding dna sequences only, and therefore no defective protein had been produced, could not cause symptoms or disease. in contrast, we now know that the 5' utr region of the mrna is required for ribosome binding, and normal protein synthesis. thus, it was also understood that some of the trinucleotide repeat mutations in which the expansion affects the utr region why cause diseases. moreover, the methylation of cytosines in a number of repeats induces epigenetic alterations (attachment of methyl-binding proteins and/or non-coding rnas, chromatin remodeling), which also explains the role of the utr mutations in disease. although as a result of the human genome project the human dna sequence is almost completely known, but knowing the sequence does not imply the identification of the gene and knowing the gene does not automatically mean the understanding of its function. this is particularly problematic in those cases where the mutation results in a new protein with different functions, but neither the original protein nor the mutation itself is known. these are the so-called gain of function mutations. it makes the genetic analysis more difficult. it is typical for huntington disease, where the exact original function of the finally identified huntington protein is still not well understood. the situation is simpler when a mutation changes the structure or the function of a previously known protein. then loss-of-function mutations are present like in the case of phenylketonuria or sickle cell anemia. these loss-of-function mutations are usually recessive, so they manifest in the phenotype only in homozygous form. this may be so because for most of the gene products the exact quantity is not crucial, and the system works correctly with half dose as well. however, there are dose-sensitive genes, where 50% of the product is not enough. this is called haploinsufficiency (haplo=single; insufficient=failure). so, the phenotype is abnormal even in heterozygotes, therefore dominant inheritance is typical for loss-of-function mutations. it also occurs that, due to the mutation, not only the original function of the gene product is lost, but the mutant product prevents normal function of the normal product, e.g. they cannot dimerize. this is called dominant-negative effect, when the mutation is associated with dominant phenotype and is also expressed in heterozygous form. dna repair: if the dna or the genes themselves can mutate in so many ways, it is not surprising that a number of mechanisms developed during evolution to ensure the integrity of the genetic material that protect against mutations and to correct the resulting errors. the name for these mechanisms is dna repair. these mechanisms are grouped according to 1/ whether it reverses the chemical reaction that causes mutation; it is the direct repair, or 2/ it cuts out the incorrect bases and replaces by correct ones; it is known as excision repair. 1/ the best example of the direct repair is the removal uv-induced thymine dimers. photoreactivation is a process typical mainly for prokaryotes and for some eukaryotes (e.g. yeast). in this process, the cyclobutane ring formed between the pyrimidine bases are slit by the use of visible light energy, and the bases remain in their original location, and the previous structure is restored. although uv radiation is one of the most mutagenic effects (just think about the growing ozone hole and the intensive uv radiation exposure over earth's surface), unfortunately, many species, including humans are not capable of this photoreactivation repair. another direct repair mechanism is the removal of alkylated bases. the o6-methylguanine methyltransferase enzyme removes the methyl group of guanine by linking it to a cysteine base in its active site. such enzymes are found both in pro- and eukaryotes. 2/ the excision repair is more common than the direct repair. there are three types: a/ base excision, b/ nucleotide excision, c/ mismatch repair, a/ during the base excision repair the single incorrectly incorporated base is spliced out and the dna polymerase fills the gap by using the intact complementary strand as a template. b/ in nucleotide excision, repair not only the mutated part e.g. thymine dimer is cleaved off, but also the preceding and following few other nucleotides, i.e. a shorter oligonucleotide sequence. then, the dna polymerase fills the gap based on the undamaged complementary strand, and dna ligase connects the old and the repaired section. for this process in humans, seven different genes are required and mutations in any of them are associated with uncorrected uv radiation-induced mutations. it is typical for rare inherited disorders, such as the cockayne syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum. the latter disease is a good example of genetic heterogeneity, since the errors of different excision repair enzymes result in the same symptoms. c/ during mismatch repair not exactly complementary bases that not exactly fit to the double helix are recognized and removed. during dna replication- in parallel with the synthesis-mismatched bases are detected and removed by the proof-reading (3' 5' exonuclease) activity of the dna polymerase enzyme. those that escape this process are corrected by the enzymes of the mismatch repair complex. while bacterial mismatch repair is relatively well, human one is less known. however, we know that the common hereditary colon cancer is caused by mutations in some genes of the mismatch repair protein complex. so not only mutations in a specific protein coding gene, but any molecular defects in the repair mechanism can also lead to disease. both the direct and the excision repair take place before dna replication, ensuring that only the correct dna molecules replication is possible. however, the cells have multiple insurance, so there are two additional, alternative, post-replication repair mechanism s in case of the failure of the first two repair processes. one of them is the recombination repair, the other is the so called error-prone or sos repair . during the recombination repair the mutation remains uncorrected- for example a thymine dimer inhibits dna synthesis, so there will be a gap in the right place in the new strand. (the synthesis is not interrupted completely because the dna polymerase- as in the case of okazaki fragments can synthesize a new strand in pieces). the gap is filled after recombining with the original strand, while the gap of the original strand derived from the previous recombination is filled by dna polymerase and ligase enzymes in cooperation. this late repair mechanism makes the correction of a mutation possible before the next dna replication. the sos or error-prone repair is known only in prokaryotes (although similar mechanisms are assumed in eukaryote s as well), and it works only in extreme cases where cell survival is at stake. when much of the dna is damaged by strong radiation or other mutagenic agents, there is no time for the precise yet time-consuming repair mechanisms mentioned above, but to correct the dna damage quickly and inaccurately, thus avoiding the immediate cell death. it is obvious that such a mechanism in multicellular eukaryotes is not necessary, since the death of a single cell does not lead to the death of the whole organism, the other cells will take over the function of the lost cell. the most difficult is to correct those mutations which are usually caused by ionizing radiation or oxidative damage resulting double-stranded dna breaks, since then- in contrast to the previously mentioned repair mechanisms- there is no template strand serving as the basis of correction. the double-stranded breaks- given that free ends are generated- increase chromosome instability and thus can lead to structural chromosomal abnormalities. there are two mechanisms to correct them: a/ the so-called non-homologous end joining (nhej) b/ the homologous recombination in nhej, a special dna ligase with a cofactor brings the broken ends together. if the double-stranded break creates fragments with overhanging strands and microhomologous sequences then the repair is most likely correct. if the fragments have blunt ends, then there is a high chance to unite not related pieces and generate structural chromosome abnormality as well. for error correction homologous recombination repair uses either the correct sequence of the homologous chromosome, or in g2 phase of the cell cycle the sister chromatid already formed as template by an enzyme system similar to that used in the crossing over. of course, not only various mechanisms for repair are available to protect genome integrity, but inactivation systems as well which can neutralize or inactivate mutagenic agents. such as the peroxisomal system in which the oxidative and thus mutagenic superoxides are eliminated by superoxide dismutase that converts peroxides h2 o2, then catalase cleaves and thus neutralizes it. mutagenicity tests: to avoid the adverse effect of mutations, however, we cannot rely exclusively on cells with evolutionarily integrated repair mechanisms, but everything possible must be done to prevent the production and the marketing materials of any mutagenic effect. this is the aim of the mutagenicity tests. according to international regulations, all prospective medicines and chemicals are subjects to the so-called pharmacological safety studies including different types of the mutagenicity tests. it is important that the widest possible spectrum of-from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, including mammals and human- in vivo or in vitro tests be carried out to eliminate the mutagenicity, the mutation- inducing effects. generally, to detect point mutations bacterial direct tests such as the ames test are the first, when the test material is directly administered to the appropriate culture of bacterial strains. however, it is also possible that not the test substance itself, but one of its metabolites is mutagenic, in this case mammalian liver microsome fraction containing enzymes necessary for the metabolism is also added to the experimental system. mutagenicity tests not only for the detection of point mutations but for the detection of mutations affecting dna repair and causing numerical and structural chromosome aberrations are also available.