genetics in diabetes: type diabetes and related traits, the past decade has seen unprecedented progress in the understanding of the genetic basis of type2 diabetes (t2 d), fueled largely by technological advancement. this has led to large scale studies such as various genome wide association studies (gwas). gene discovery efforts for type 2 diabetes touching upon gwas studies in t2d which led to the identification of around 70 genomic loci. even in the absence of mechanistic understanding gwas signal, patterns still provide insights into disease pathogenesis. the variants associated with t2d have been predominantly through insulin secretion rather than peripheral insulin sensitivity. a similar case is presented in traits such as obesity and body mass index (bmi). that these genetic variants have a physiological and pathological role is evident. gwas data have shown that physiological variation in fasting glucose levels does not overlap with those implicated in pathological deterioration of glycaemic control often. this has been explained by the authors through magic (the metaanalyses of glucose and insulin related traits consortium) study. fine mapping of t2d susceptibility loci: a range of approaches for assaying genetic variation across complex human traits loci and the methodologies for fine mapping causal variants in these regions have been delineated. the genetic architecture and pathophysiological mechanisms underpinning the diseases, fine mapping of loci is very important. the advent of next generation sequencing (ngs) has stepped up the tempo for discovery and interrogation of the full catalogue of human genetic variation. unlike the sanger sequencing, ngs could generate a huge amount of data. gwas studies of glycaemic traits, posing first, the question on glycaemic traits and then answering that disease subclassification is possible through glycaemic traits which are highly regulated within each individual and that the identification of genetic loci that influence glycaemic traits is an avenue to understand this. international collaborative efforts are the best way to generate massive data to understand the genetic underpinning of t2d. obesity and related traits touching upon the genetic architecture of obesity traits such as whr, bmi and also stressing the need for in vitro experiments and experiments on model organisms to elucidate the biological mechanism of obesity. gene discovery efforts for monogenic disorders of cell dysfunction and insulin resistance. while t2d is affected by a combination of genes and environment, monogenic forms of t2 dare more genetically enriched. the advent of ngshas helped in the diagnosis of monogenic diabetes and also in the discovery of novel aetiologies. the application of targeted ngs for clinical diagnostic testing or screening of known genes and exome analysis for novel gene discovery. the strategy for discovery and diagnosis of gene variants in neonatal diabetes and mody (maturity onset diabetes of the young), has been detailed. the importance of genetic testing and treatment changes due to mutations in genes with high translational potential is also emphasized. omics of t2d and related traits, the new field of epigenetic modifications in t2d is reviewed well. transcriptome analysis serves as a tool for disease biology understanding is well accounted for. this is followed by genomics of adipose tissue and advancement in understanding of its role in obesity and its traits. the importance of continuing genetic, epigenetic and transcript data to understand the importance of gene variants discovered by gwas. a good account on the future directions of functional translation which will deliver to clinical medicine is also available. the advancements in the study of mouse models for understanding molecular mechanisms of diabetes and obesity. the fto gene has been identified as one of the obesities associated genes. whether it is possible to get the right drug at the right dose for the right person is a million-dollar question. the clinical impact of genetic diagnosis is discussed, taking mody as an example. the myriad clinical potentials of genomics, where patient stratification, prediction of risk of diabetes and its complications, therapeutic stratification and the discovery of novel therapeutic targets are possible. 
